# Anthropogenic tritium: Inventory, discharge, environmental behavior and health effects

**Authors**: Baojie Nie<sup>a</sup>, Sheng Fang<sup>c</sup>, Man Jiang<sup>d</sup>, Laishun Wang<sup>a</sup>, Muyi Ni<sup>a</sup>, Jiye Zheng<sup>b</sup>, Zhiyi Yang<sup>b,\*</sup>, Fengchen Li<sup>a,\*</sup>  

**Affiliations**:  
a. Sino-French Institute of Nuclear Engineering and Technology, Sun Yat-Sen University, Zhuhai, Guangdong, 519082, China  
b. Nuclear and Radiation Safety Center, MEE, Beijing, 100082, China  
c. Institute of Nuclear and New Energy Technology, Collaborative Innovation Centre of Advanced Nuclear Energy Technology, Key Laboratory of Advanced Reactor Engineering and Safety of Ministry of Education, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China  
d. Department of Nuclear Engineering and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, 430074, China  

**Journal**: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews  
**Volume**: 135 (2021) 110188  

---

## A R T I C L E   I N F O

**Keywords**: Nuclear energy; Tritium; Discharge; Environmental impact; Radiation dose

---

## A B S T R A C T

As a special and dominant radionuclide released from the nuclear industry, tritium is a "superstar" radionuclide receiving significant concerns from the scientific community, regulators and even the public. This characteristic gradually becomes more and more prominent along with the rapid development of fusion energy research in particular and operations of fusion nuclear reactors as well. Various aspects of tritium studies including, but not limited to, the tritium resource, fusion tritium technology (such as extraction, separation and fueling), tritium management and discharge, tritium environmental behavior, radiation dose and health effects have been and are being conducted. The objectives of this study are as follows: (1) to detail the tritium production, inventory and discharge of nuclear facilities from the perspectives of both practices and regulatory requirements, (2) to illustrate tritium environmental behavior & modeling in both the terrestrial and aquatic systems, in which an air-water transfer behavior (deposition and evaporation) was specifically explained, (3) to identify and discuss the radiation dose to a person under normal and accidental tritium discharges, (4) to review the health effects and risks in relation to tritium exposure. The main contribution is to comprehensively recognize the anthropogenic tritium from its generation to the possible damage to human health. It is expected to be instrumental for the beginners in the related fields and attract more scholars' attention to the tritium safety issue when performing directly or related studies so as to ensure the safe operation of nuclear systems, in particular the future fusion energy system.

---

## 1. Introduction

Energy plays a pivotal role in human activities and to some extent, per capita consumption of energy represents economic development level of the nations around the world. Nuclear energy is beneficial for climate and human health as it results in lower greenhouse gas and air pollutant emissions than the fossil fuels which still contribute most to the energy production in the current energy system [1]. However, just like a double-edged sword, nuclear energy also comes with an additional radiation risk to human health. A significant concern about the radionuclides release, environmental impact and human health for nuclear industry has been and is being recognized by the scientific community, regulators and even the public. This characteristic gradually becomes more and more prominent along with the occurrences of the three most widely-concerned severe nuclear accidents in particular, i.e., TMI, Chernobyl and Fukushima nuclear accidents [2-4].

Among all the regulatory gaseous and liquid radioactive effluents, tritium belongs to a "mystical" and "superstar" radionuclide that has gained a great deal of interest from the scientific community. The reasons could be listed as follows: (1) Tritium is really the primary contributor to the total radioactive releases in both normal gaseous and liquid radioactive effluents from the present nuclear facilities [5,6]. Given radioactive effluents released from Korean NPPs including 20 PWRs and 4 HWRs for example, gaseous and liquid tritium contributes about 39-48% and 45-57% to the total released radioactivity, respectively [6]. (2) Tritium is the major concern of fusion system and it is one of the safety issues caused widely attention in the development of fusion energy [7]. (3) Tritium in the environment cannot be separated and it would transfer from air to soil, plant and animals through the water and organics cycle [8,9]. (4) Treatment of tritium faces enormous technical challenges, and tritium is directly released into the environment for most of the current nuclear facilities [10]. (5) The public holds strong concerns about tritium release and its health effects, especially after the Fukushima accident [11].

Tritium safety is a systemic project, covering the whole process of tritium generation, extraction, separation, storage, fueling, discharge, environmental migration and transformation, as well as radiation dose and health effects. However, the public, sometimes even the scholars are one-sided or confused on the tritium safety issue. Understanding the whole process of tritium safety is beneficial for grasping the tritium research status, finding the knowledge gaps and better ensuring the safe operation of nuclear systems. On the other hand, it is a fact that the ambitious researches and the rapid development of fusion energy around the world further promote the concern about tritium safety as existing NPPs have orders of magnitude lower tritium inventories than ITER or FPP [12]. Existing facilities with comparable tritium inventory exist only in the field of nuclear weapons (such as Savannah River Site in USA) [13]. In addition, some also proposed to pay close attention to tritium releases from fusion reactors and its safety issue [14].

The objectives of this study are as follows: (1) to detail the tritium production, inventory and discharge of nuclear facilities from the perspectives of both practices and regulatory requirements, (2) to illustrate tritium environmental behavior & modeling in both the terrestrial and aquatic systems, in which an air-water transfer behavior (deposition and evaporation) was specifically explained, (3) to identify and discuss the radiation dose to a person under normal and accidental tritium discharges, (4) to review the health effects and risks in relation to tritium exposure. The main contribution is to comprehensively recognize the anthropogenic tritium from its generation to the possible damage to human health. It is expected to be instrumental for the beginners in the related fields and attract more scholars' attention to the tritium safety issue when performing directly or related studies so as to ensure the safe operation of nuclear systems, in particular the future fusion energy system.

---

## 2. Historical and projected nuclear energy development

Nuclear energy has been playing an important role in the energy demand (especially the electricity generation) since the first NPP in the world was operated in 1954. From 1985 to 2018 electricity generation data provided in the power reactor information system of IAEA [15], nuclear contributed about 10-18% to the total electricity generation around the world. And this fraction varies greatly between different nations. In 2018 for example, the nuclear fraction exceeds 70% in France while it was only 4.2% in China. By the end of September 29, 2019, a total up to 449 nuclear reactors were in operation across the world. Most were distributed in the developed nations such as Northern America (115 reactors), followed by Far East Asia (114), Western Europe (112). Only very few distributed in the Africa (2) and Latin America (7). With regard to the reactor type, the general PWR is the favorite type which contributed 66.8% followed by the BWR, PHWR, GCR, LWGR and FBR.

For the nuclear reactors under construction, they mostly distribute in the developing nations such as China and India. Thus, from this perspective, the unexpected second nuclear era would tilt to the developing nations. In reality, IAEA has made a projection for the future nuclear energy development in the period of 2019-2050 [16]. Both the low and high scenarios were given, and the nuclear fraction in the world is projected to be between 6% and 12% respectively.

Regarding the future fusion energy development, a roadmap including several plans and devices were proposed and in implementation in order to master fusion energy around the world. The first is the ITER [17], which is the largest international energy cooperation project and consists of 7 members. At present, the ITER is under construction at Cadarache in France and is expected to achieve the first plasma in December 2025 and DT operation in 2035. The second is the next fusion reactors named fusion engineering test reactor or DEMO. China proposed a concept of CFETR, which has finished the CDA during 2011-2017 and is currently in the EDA phase [18]. It is scheduled to complete the EDA in the 2020s and to start up the construction as soon as possible. The USA proposed a concept of FNSF [19], whereas the Europe, Japan and South Korea directly proposed to construct EU-DEMO, JA DEMO and K-DEMO, respectively [20-23]. After the successful practices of the above fusion concepts, the fusion power plants would be expected to construct finally. It seems to be a consensus that the next fusion reactor for energy generation would begin to operate in the 2050s. The historical and projected nuclear energy development including the fusion roadmap is summarized in Fig. 1.

> **Fig. 1. Historical and projected nuclear energy development.**  
> a) Historical total electricity generation and nuclear electricity contribution during 1985-2018. The nuclear electricity fraction was 10-18% in this period [15].  
> b) Nuclear electricity fraction of different nations in 2018 and reactor type fraction around the world. The maximum nuclear electricity fraction >70% appeared in France.  
> c) Projected nuclear energy including two cases in the period of 2018-2050 given by IAEA [16].  
> d) Research and development roadmap for fusion energy. It seems to be a consensus that the next fusion reactor for energy generation would begin to operate in the 2050s.  
> CDA: Conceptual Design Activity; EDA: Engineering Design Activity

---

## 3. Tritium production, distribution and discharge

### 3.1. Production and distribution of tritium in the world

Tritium, with a half-life of ~12.3 years, is mainly produced through three pathways. Firstly, the natural tritium resource is generated through the nuclear reaction when cosmic rays pass through the Earth's upper atmosphere and the possibly accretion from the solar wind. An equilibrium amount of ~3.5 kg (1 g equal to \(3.57\times 10^{14}~\mathrm{Bq}\)) is present from this pathway [24]. Secondly, tritium also comes from the atmospheric nuclear tests, in particular in the late 1950s and the early 1960s. About 520-550 kg tritium was estimated to be injected in the atmospheric during this period [25]. This pathway was gradually stopped with the adoption of the 1963 Partial Test-Ban Treaty, the 1974 Threshold Test-Ban Treaty and the 1996 Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty [26]. Thirdly, the most important pathway of tritium production is from nuclear facilities, in particular the civil HWR and military purpose by irradiating lithium.

From the operational experiences of HWRs, about 0.228 kg (ranging from 0.21 to 0.26 kg) tritium would be generated as an adjunct for a 1 GWe HWR after the operation of 1 FPY [27]. Since the 1960s, HWR was started to construct worldwide. The power peak of HWR appeared in the 1980s. Till now, there are 4 under construction in India, 49 under operational state and 9 under permanent shutdown. Most of the HWRs are distributed in Canada, India and South Korea. The historical and projected annual tritium production amount from these reactors is evaluated and showed in Fig. 2. Note that the projected tritium production rate is based on a scenario that no new HWR would be constructed in the future, the operational period is 55 years and the operation factor is set according to the historical experiences and design value (for prediction). It can be seen from Fig. 2 that the peak value of tritium production rate would appear in the 2020s as most of the HWRs constructed in the 1980s would be decommissioned after the 2030s. In addition, the annual tritium production amount is about several kilograms from these nuclear reactors. By the end of 2018, about 134 kg tritium was produced from HWRs in the world. Canada (88.72 kg) contributes 67% to the total tritium production amount, followed by India (14.23 kg) and South Korea (12.26 kg). Tritium production in the remaining nations owning HWRs such as Argentina, Romania, China and Pakistan is approximately several kilograms. These results showed in Fig. 2 correspond well with other previous studies [27,28]. Previous studies also reported the tritium inventory produced from HWRs for the purpose of assessing the tritium available for fusion reactors in the world and claimed that the maximum tritium inventory would be 60-70 kg in the 2020s [27].

Apart from the commercial use, tritium is also a key element in thermonuclear weapons. Tritium in the weapons stockpile must be replenished continually because of the decay rate of 5.47% per year. Thus, tritium was specially produced to maintain the thermonuclear weapons. As it is hard to distinguish the DT weapon ratio in a total number of 9340 deployed and stored warheads in the world (given by SIPRI in January 2020) [29], only a rough estimation could be made on the annual supply requirements of tritium to maintain these warheads as follows. The tritium quantity needed in a boosted bomb is approximately 4 g [27]. Thus, tritium requirement to maintain the warheads is about 2044 g/a due to decay factor when all warheads are made up of DT fuel. A higher value was given in the literature [30] based on a higher tritium inventory of about 7 g (20 g as an upper limit) per warhead. Total number of nuclear warheads show a decrease tendency every year. Thus, tritium inventory and requirement would decrease according to this tendency. It is a complex political issue regarding the development of nuclear weapons. The number of nuclear warheads in the USA and Russia contribute >90% in the world. In the USA, there are two tritium production phase for military purposes. Before the late 1980s, tritium was mainly generated from military HWRs at SRS by irradiating a lithium aluminum alloy. At that time, the peak value of tritium stockpile was approximately 100 kg [31]. The tritium production ended when the reactors at Savannah River were shut down for safety reasons in 1988. As a result of the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty signed in 1991, cold war tritium stockpiles were adequate to maintain the arsenal of the USA for many years. Thus, no tritium was produced during 1988-2003. Until December 1998, the DOE decided to produce tritium using a commercial power reactor (1200 MWe PWR) such as Watts Bar 1 operated by the TVA through irradiating the TPBARs assemblies [32]. Tritium production at Watts Bar 1 started in 2003 with a current tritium production rate of 950 g/a and the current tritium stockpile is about 20-30 kg [31]. Other two commercial power reactors at Sequoyah site are expected to generate tritium using TPBARs in the 2020s. In Russia, the production and processing of tritium mainly takes place at Chelyabinsk-65 since 1979. Tritium is produced in two reactors named "Ruslan" and "Ludmila" by neutron irradiation of lithium targets. These reactors are capable of producing 3.4 kg tritium per year [33].

Considering both civilian and military tritium production pathways, it is obvious that tritium production from military facilities is larger than the commercial HWRs. It is expected that the USA, Russia and Canada own the most tritium inventory (tens of kilograms). Europe and other nations such as India, South Korea and China own several kilograms tritium.

With regard to the distribution and applications, majority of the tritium produced from the first two pathways distributes in the oceans after a period of tritium cycle in the environment. The literature [25] systematically gathered a database of tritium concentration available in oceans and calculated the inventory of oceanic tritium. For the tritium produced from the HWRs, most are recycled through operating a TRF. Only a small part of recycled tritium was supplied for the commercial use (e.g., to serve as light sources and tracer). Both Canada and South Korea own the TRF to extract tritium from their HWRs. In Canada, the OPG (operator of the HWRs and TRF) usually sells about 100-200 g/a tritium for non-fusion demand from the start of the TRF [27]. The trading amount would fluctuate in some special requirements such as providing tritium for future ITER operation. According to the tritium requirement plan of ITER, totaling 12.3 kg tritium would be needed due to DT operation since 2036 [27]. The market price of tritium provided in Canada is about US\$25-30 million/kg. In South Korea, although about 8.15 kg tritium has been separated and recovered through the operation of TRF since 2007 [34], no commercial trade appeared as the recovered tritium was put into the secure storage vault inside the plant [35]. Other nations without TRF have to temporarily store the tritiated water at the site before developing a TRF. However, it was a big challenge to develop a TRF to process the tritiated water for the following reasons. On one hand, the high cost of tritium removal equipment made detritiation unattractive for the nation with only a small number of HWRs. Thus, generally no plans were made at the initial stage to operate a HWR. On the other hand, tritium extraction technology was confidential and was not easy to obtain, as proved by the case of Romania. The Cernavoda NPP in Romania is a HWR, and it had to wait about 27 years (start of construction in 1982) to develop a TRF [36].

> **Fig. 2. HWRs construction worldwide and corresponding annual tritium production amount.**  
> a) Global HWRs construction since the 1960s [15].  
> b) Evaluation of historical and projected annual tritium production amount from HWRs which included 4 under construction in India, 49 under operation and 9 under permanent shutdown. Note that the projected tritium production rate is based on a scenario that no new HWRs would be constructed in the future, the operational period is 55 years and the operation factor originates from the historical experiences and design value (for prediction).

### 3.2. Tritium distribution in the nuclear facility

In a fission nuclear facility, tritium is mainly produced through the ternary fission reaction of nuclear fuels and activation of materials including the coolant, moderator and control rods. For the general PWR, the tritium production from ternary fission is the most important pathway and the total tritium production rate is about 2.2 g/a after 1 FPY operation of a 1000 MWe plant [37]. In contrast to the PWR, a significant amount of tritium is produced from heavy water coolant in a HWR through the \(^{2}\mathrm{H}(\mathrm{n},\gamma)^{3}\mathrm{H}\) nuclear reaction. Under the same reactor power and operational time, the tritium production rate of a HWR is two orders of magnitude larger than that of a PWR. The same proportion also appears in the tritium inventory and discharge [38].

In a future DT fusion nuclear facility, tritium is one of the important nuclear fuels. A target named tritium self-sufficiency defined as that the fusion system could produce enough tritium to supply its own consumption and loss should be achieved because of the lack of tritium resource available for fusion reactors [39]. A blanket system was designed to surround the burning plasma and breed tritium through the \(^{6}\mathrm{Li}(\mathrm{n},\alpha)^{3}\mathrm{H}\) nuclear reaction. For ITER, only 4 TBMs including two water-cooled and two helium-cooled types would be installed in 2 equatorial ports to test tritium breeding performances among the total 440 blanket modules (covering ~610 m²) [40]. Thus, only 4 g/a of tritium production rate would be possibly achieved through this way, and so the tritium self-sufficiency would not be fully validated. Another tritium production pathway appears in the plasma due to the DD fusion reaction. Tritium production rate of ITER is very low because of both the low TBM coverage rate (~1%) and operation factor (~2.3%) [41,42]. For CFETR and DEMO, tritium production rate would reach several to a hundred kilograms per year, which is much larger than that of ITER due to almost all tritium breeding blanket coverage and high operation factor (>50%) [43]. Although the tritium production rate of ITER is relatively low, the total inventory at ITER site would be up to 3-4 kg due to the low tritium burn-up fraction (~0.3%, possibly reach 1%), uncertain tritium cycle time (target: 1 h) and low tritium breeding rate [44]. The tritium inventory of CFETR or DEMO was evaluated to be at the same level as ITER although the accurate value has not been determined finally [45]. A principle and target to achieve a minimum tritium inventory is the consensus for the perspectives of both radiation safety and tritium self-sufficiency [46]. Regarding the tritium distribution in the fusion system, all tritium (~kilograms) would be stored in the tritium plant before the operation of the reactor. Once the burning of DT plasma launched, tritium amount in the VV or fusion reactor increased gradually and could reach a maximum value up to kilograms level. With the operation of a fusion reactor, some tritiated wastes would be stored in other buildings such as hot cell as temporary storage room. According to lessons from ITER, tritium distribution in VV, tritium plant and hot cell should not exceed 1 kg, respectively. As for the next fusion reactor, tritium distribution in VV might be larger than for ITER as a tritium breeding blanket would be introduced. And tritium distribution in other systems might be at the same level as in ITER. Table 1 summarizes the tritium production, inventory and discharge of nuclear facilities.

**Table 1. Tritium production, inventory and regulatory discharge in nuclear facilities.**

| Reactor type | Sub-system | T production | T inventory | Regulatory T discharge limit (Gaseous) | Regulatory T discharge limit (Liquid) | References |
|--------------|------------|--------------|-------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|------------|
| **Fission** | | | | | | |
| PWR¹ | Core materials | 2.171 g/a | Grams | Summarized in Table 2 | | [37] |
| HWR¹ | Coolant | 0.039–0.063 g/a | | | | |
| | Coolant | 210–260 g/a | | | | |
| **Fusion** | | | | | | |
| ITER¹ | Plasma | 1.66 g/a | 0.167 g | 0.6 g/a (normal) | 0.00056 g/a | |
| | PFM | × | ≤1 kg | 2.5 g/a (heavy maintenance) | | |
| | TBM | 4 g/a | Unclear | | | |
| | T storage beds | × | ≤1 kg | | | |
| | T plant | × | ≤1 kg | | | |
| | Hot cell | × | ≤1 kg | | | |
| CFETR¹ | Plasma | 14.4 g/a | ITER level | 5–33 g/a (proposed) | Unclear | |
| | PFM | × | ITER level | | | |
| | Blanket | 6.116 kg/a | ≤2 kg? | | | |
| | T storage beds | × | ITER level? | | | |
| | T plant | × | ITER level? | | | |
| | Hot cell | × | ITER level? | | | |
| DEMO or FPP | Plasma | 230 g/a | ITER level | Same level as fission? | Unclear | |
| | PFM | × | ITER level | | | |
| | Blanket | 98 kg/a | ≤2 kg? | | | |
| | T storage beds | × | ITER level? | | | |
| | T plant | × | ITER level? | | | |
| | Hot cell | × | ITER level? | | | |

> a For tritium production, both the PWR and HWR are assumed as 1 FPY operation of 1000 MWe plant.  
> b For ITER, the fusion power and operation factor are 500 MW and 2.3%, respectively.  
> c For CFETR, the fusion power, operation factor and TBR are assumed as 200 MW, 50% and 1.1.  
> d For DEMO or FPP, the fusion power, operation factor and TBR are assumed as 2 GW, 80% and 1.1.

### 3.3. Regulatory and practical tritium discharge from nuclear facility

With regard to management measures of tritium discharge, it is worth mentioning three international organizations: UNSCEAR, ICRP and IAEA. UNSCEAR was established by the United Nations General Assembly in 1955 to assess and report levels and effects of all sources of ionizing radiation conducts regular surveys of radiation exposure worldwide. ICRP is a not-for-profit organization which provides recommendations and guidance on protection against the risks associated with ionizing radiation from artificial sources and naturally occurring sources. IAEA is an autonomous intergovernmental organization dedicated to increasing the contribution of atomic energy to the world's peace and well-being and ensuring that agency assistance is not used for military purposes. IAEA made safety standard and guidance on the basis of recommendations from UNSCEAR and ICRP. However, these organizations do not release the clear tritium discharge limit for nuclear industry apart from general principles for setting limits [48]. The discharge limits should satisfy the requirements not to exceed the dose constraints [49].

At national level, a variety of management measures in relation to tritium discharge were taken according to the regulations or standards. The first is to set up tritium discharge rate limit directly. In China, a universal limit is defined in the regulation (GB 6249-2011) that the gaseous and liquid tritium discharge rate should not exceed 15 and 75 TBq/a for a 3000 MWt (thermal capacity) PWR, respectively [50]. And for the HWR with the same power, the gaseous and liquid tritium discharge rates limits are 450 and 350 TBq/a, respectively. Moreover, for a site with several nuclear power reactors, the total tritium discharge rates could be extended to a value 4 times larger than the above ones. In addition to the universal limits, a specific permission value was usually approved by supervision departments for some specific sites (e.g., the permission values of gaseous and liquid tritium discharge for Qinshan nuclear power base involving seven PWRs and two HWRs are 708 and 804 TBq/a, respectively). Under the universal limits and permission value, the operator would also made a management objective value to restrict tritium discharge. In France, similar management measures were taken. The discharge limits vary from site to site depending on the power and critical groups. For instance, the gaseous and liquid tritium discharge limits are 5 and 60 TBq/a for the Flamanville site with two 1300 MWe PWRs, respectively. While the liquid tritium discharge limit for the Saint Laurent-des-Eaux site with two 900 MWe PWRs is 45 TBq/a [51]. In the USA, the nuclear regulatory commission gives the limits that the gaseous and liquid tritium concentrations in the radioactive effluents must not exceed \(1\times 10^{-4}~\mu\mathrm{Ci/mL}\) and \(1~\mu\mathrm{Ci/L}\) respectively [52]. The second is to set up the DRLs based on public dose limits. In Canada, different DRLs were established for different nuclear power sites. For instance, the DRL for liquid tritium from Point Lepreau site is \(1.6\times 10^{19}~\mathrm{Bq/a}\) which is higher than other sites such as Darlington (\(4.3\times 10^{18}~\mathrm{Bq/a}\)) because the effluent from Point Lepreau site is discharged to the sea water. The DRL for gaseous tritium (in form of HTO) discharge from Point Lepreau is \(4.3\times 10^{17}~\mathrm{Bq/a}\). While DRLs for both gaseous HTO and HT discharge from Darlington are set as \(4.3\times 10^{16}\) and \(8.1\times 10^{17}~\mathrm{Bq/a}\), respectively (DRL for HT resulting from the TRF at Darlington) [53]. In addition, a tritium concentration limit in drinking water around the nuclear facility was also proposed that a new nuclear facility with tritium discharge incorporates a discharge design objective of \(100~\mathrm{Bq/L}\) (corresponding to \(0.0013~\mathrm{mSv/a}\)) for tritium in groundwater at the margin of the nuclear facility's control area [54]. In South Korea, DRLs are also given for Wolong NPP Unit 1 (HWR). The DRLs for gaseous and liquid tritium discharge are \(1.05\times 10^{17}\) and \(3.48\times 10^{16}~\mathrm{Bq/a}\), respectively [55]. It should be noted that the DRLs in Canada and Korea are generally much larger than the above universal limits in China and France. Table 2 summarizes the practical and regulatory tritium discharge amount under normal operation of nuclear facilities in Korea, China, France and Canada, respectively. It can be seen that tritium discharge from HWR is higher than PWR, and tritium discharge from Canada owning the most HWRs is much larger than other nations. In contrast to the regulations, the real tritium discharge is below the regulatory limit when taking China who has a clear regulatory discharge limit for example.

In terms of tritium discharge from military sites, the SRS in the USA was selected as an example. The SRS was constructed during the early 1950s to support the National Nuclear Security Agency defense programs mission. Five reactors were built to produce the basic materials, primarily tritium and plutonium-239, used in nuclear weapons at the site. In addition, several related supporting facilities are also located at SRS, including two chemical separations plants, a heavy water extraction plant, a nuclear fuel and target fabrication facility, a tritium extraction facility and waste management facilities. Before the late 1980s, the tritium in the SRS mainly came from the HWRs for military purpose at SRS by irradiating a lithium aluminum alloy. After the early 2000s, the tritium in the SRS was generated in a commercial power reactor Watts Bar 1 operated by the TVA through irradiating TPBARs (delivery to SRS for tritium extraction) [31]. According to the annual report of radiological impact of operations at the SRS, the average gaseous and liquid tritium discharge during 2014-2018 are \(8.28\times 10^{14}\) and \(2.35\times 10^{13}~\mathrm{Bq/a}\), respectively [56]. Thus, the liquid tritium discharge from the SRS is at the same level to the civil NPP site, but gaseous tritium discharge is slightly higher than the civil NPP site.

Another noteworthy facility is the spent fuel reprocessing plant. Tritium discharge should not be neglected though the number of spent fuel reprocessing plants is small in the world compared with NPP. La Hague plant located in France is a world-leading facility with the highest reprocessing capacity of 1700 t heavy metal from LWR. Since 1976, it has been treating the spent nuclear fuel from France, Japan, Germany, etc. At the end of 2006, about 23000 t LWR fuel were reprocessed at La Hague plant. On the other hand, La Hague is also currently the largest anthropogenic source of radioactivity release to the environment. From the practices, La Hague has permission to discharge very large amount of radioactivity into the environment. The gaseous and liquid discharge limits of tritium from the La Hague plant are 2200 and 37000 TBq/a (adjusted to 150 and 18500 TBq/a since January 2007), respectively [57]. This means tritium discharge limit for La Hague plant is two to four orders of magnitude larger than those for a 1300 MWe PWR at the Flamanville site mentioned above.

From the summary of existing facilities including civil NPPs, military sites and spent fuel reprocessing plant, a wide tritium discharge level from TBq to tens of PBq appeared in the different facilities. Thus, a remarkable difference exists in the cognition of tritium discharge in different nations.

Regarding the tritium discharge from fusion reactor, only ITER has a regulatory (not practical discharge) experience while others (CFETR, EU-DEMO etc.) are still in the CDA or EDA stage. Gaseous tritium discharge limit of ITER is controlled below 214 TBq/a (0.6 g/a) under normal operation and 893 TBq/a under the heavy maintenance [47]. The liquid tritium discharge for ITER is only 0.2 TBq/a, which is very small in contrast to liquid tritium discharge from current nuclear facilities. Regarding other new fusion nuclear facilities, some new regulatory tritium discharge might be defined in the future on the basis of the lessons learnt from ITER and the existing regulations or standards associated with tritium discharge summarized above. It should be noted that the tritium discharge from a next-generation fusion reactor might be larger than that of ITER. Such as for CFETR, on the premise of obeying the principle that tritium discharge should be minimized to as low as reasonably achievable, a previous study proposed a gaseous tritium discharge limit of 1785-11781 TBq/a from the perspectives of tritium discharge limit for current NPP and reverse value based on public dose limit of \(0.25~\mathrm{mSv/a}\) in China [46]. The tritium discharge from the future fusion power plants should be lower than that of fission NPPs, indicating that the fusion nuclear power is an attractive ideal energy from the perspective of tritium safety.

**Table 2. Practical and regulatory tritium discharge under normal operation of nuclear facilities.**

| Types | Country | Average normalised T discharge (Gaseous, Bq/GWa) | Average normalised T discharge (Liquid, Bq/GWa) | Regulatory limits of T discharge (Gaseous) | Regulatory limits of T discharge (Liquid) | References |
|-------|---------|---------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|------------|
| PWR NPP | Korea¹ | \(2.32 \times 10^{12}\) | \(8.36 \times 10^{12}\) | ECL | | [6] |
| | China² | \(6.02 \times 10^{11}\) (2011–2015) | \(2.39 \times 10^{13}\) (2011–2015) | \(1.5 \times 10^{13}~\mathrm{Bq/GWa}\) | \(7.5 \times 10^{13}~\mathrm{Bq/GWa}\) | [50,58] |
| | France | Discharge limits vary from site to site | | | | [59] |
| HWR NPP | Korea³ | \(1.01 \times 10^{12}\) | \(2.03 \times 10^{13}\) | \(1.05 \times 10^{17}~\mathrm{Bq/a}\) (DRL) | \(3.48 \times 10^{16}~\mathrm{Bq/a}\) (DRL) | [6,55] |
| | China³ | \(2.73 \times 10^{13}\) (2011–2015) | \(4.5 \times 10^{14}~\mathrm{Bq/GWa}\) | \(3.5 \times 10^{14}~\mathrm{Bq/GWa}\) | | [50,58] |
| | Canada³ | \(2.76 \times 10^{13}\) | \(4.3 \times 10^{16}~\mathrm{Bq/a}\) (HTO) | \(4.3 \times 10^{18}~\mathrm{Bq/a}\) (DRL) | | [53] |
| SRS (Military) | USA³ | \(8.28 \times 10^{14}\) (2014–2018) | \(2.35 \times 10^{13}\) (2014–2018) | Not found | | [56] |
| La Hague plant³ | France | \(6.42 \times 10^{13}\) | \(1.27 \times 10^{16}\) | \(1.5 \times 10^{14}~\mathrm{Bq/a}\) | \(1.85 \times 10^{16}~\mathrm{Bq/a}\) (after Jan. 2007) | [51,57] |

> ¹ Normalised tritium discharge data of Korean HWRs originates from the Wolong site including 4 HWRs and 2 PWRs. As for the regulatory tritium discharge, Korean PWR applies the ECL defined as the derived radionuclide concentrations. Korean HWR applies self-imposed control limits which are lower than DRL in order to control effluents more strictly. In reality, the Korean regulatory body enacted a new regulation in 2017. It requires a nuclear license to establish the total amount of radioactivity in radioactivity effluents from Korean PWR. All Korean NPPs submitted their effluent control plans (total amount of radioactivity per year) to the regulatory body, and the applications are under review by the regulatory body. The DRLs for gaseous and liquid tritium discharge are for the Wolong NPP Unit 1.  
> ² Data of average normalised tritium discharge from the PWR in China were based on Qinshan NPP, Qinshan NPP II, Daya Bay NPP and Lingao NPP. Data of average normalised tritium discharge from the HWR were based on the Qinshan NPP III which is the sole HWR in China. Data of regulatory tritium discharge for fission originates from the Chinese regulation GB6249-2011. For a site with several nuclear power reactors, the total discharge amount can be extended to a value four times larger than the above one.  
> ³ DRLs in Canada vary from site to site. Above DRLs for the Darlington are the highest as the TRF located in Darlington site. At SRS, gaseous tritium discharge is mainly from the separation facilities (including separations, waste management and tritium processing facilities) with a discharge rate 1-2 orders of magnitude higher than tritium discharge from reactors. While, liquid tritium discharge from separation facilities and reactors are same level. Tritium discharge data and limit for SRS and La Hague plant is the total amount from the site, which is a bit different with the normalised discharge data for NPPs.

### 3.4. Historical typical tritium accidental release

Apart from a huge amount of tritium (520-560 kg) injected in the atmospheric in the last century due to nuclear weapon test [25], tritium accidental releases mainly appeared in tritium laboratories (plant level) or severe nuclear accidents from the historical operational practices. Compared with the NPP such as PWR type, a tritium laboratory may have a considerable inventory and operational amount. The typical tritium laboratory with a significant tritium inventory includes the TLK constructed in KIT of Germany, the TPL constructed in JAEA of Japan, the SRS and the TSTA in the USA and the CRNL in Canada. The TLK was mainly designed for the conduction of experiments relevant to fusion research (ITER) and neutrino physics (KATRIN) as well as other EU-projects. The tritium in the TLK comes from Canada and a license for handling of up to 40 g was applied in September 2007 [60]. The TPL was mainly designed for fusion experiments since 1988 with a tritium license amount up to 62 g and a practical operating amount (30-60 g) [61]. The SRS serving for military field has been introduced in the previous section. It was pointed out that the tritium inventory at SRS reached approximately 8 kg [13]. In fact, many accidents associated with tritium releases from SRS were also reported in the early years (1974-1990, showed in Table 3) [62,63]. The TSTA at Los Alamos National Laboratory was started to develop in 1978 to demonstrate the technology and safety operation of selected tritium processing systems required for a fusion reactor. The TSTA's mission was regarded as completing successfully and the facility should be stabilized and deactivated in 2001, completed finally in 2003. The licensed tritium inventory in TSTA was 200 g and the actual tritium inventory at the completion of the TSTA operation mission was about 140 g [13,64]. The CRNL was designed to support its HWR (CANDU reactor) and also the fusion development. The tritium in the laboratory comes from the HWR and a practical tritium operational amount has reached 100 g [65]. The typical tritium laboratories and historical tritium accidental releases are showed in Table 3.

Regarding the tritium accidental release, some laboratories such as TPL declared that no tritium release accidents had occurred [61]. And no tritium release accidents were reported in TLK from the previous literatures. The SRS reported tritium release accidents many times and about a total amount up to 108 g tritium were released into the atmosphere during 1974-1990 [62,63]. Just in 1974, 50 g tritium (1% in form of HTO) was released into the environment in an accident. In the September 1984 accident, 4.5 g tritium in the form of HTO was released into the environment. These tritium release accidents greatly increased the tritium radiation level to the environment around the sites. For the CRNL, some famous anthropogenic tritium (in the form of HT) release experiments were conducted in the 1980s to explore HT oxidation and HTO re-emission behavior as there was no clear agreement concerning the environmental fate of HT [66]. The results indicated that no rapid oxidation of HT in air and the formation of HTO in soils (oxidation of HT in soil) followed by its reemission accounts for the majority of HTO in air during HT release.

In addition to the tritium release accidents happened in the tritium laboratories, small amount of tritium was also released from the nuclear accidents of NPPs. Taking the three widely-concerned severe nuclear accidents for example, about 0.07 g, 0.10 g (3.92 g as the inventory) and 0.28-1.40 g tritium were released from the TMI, Chernobyl and Fukushima nuclear accidents, respectively [67-71]. Thus, tritium release amount was a relatively small value in each of the previous nuclear accidents because of the small tritium inventory in the LWR.

**Table 3. Typical tritium facilities and historical tritium release during some typical accidents.**

| T laboratory | Subject | T come from | Licensed T inventory | Operated inventory | References |
|--------------|---------|-------------|----------------------|--------------------|------------|
| TLK in Germany | Fusion and basic physics | Canada | 40 g | 25 g | [60] |
| TPL in Japan | Fusion | USA and Canada | 62 g | 36 g | [61] |
| SRS in the USA | Nuclear weapon | T production reactor in the USA | ~8000 g | Not reported | [13] |
| TSTA in the USA (Decommissioned) | Fusion | Not found | 200 g | 140 g | [13,64] |
| CRNL in Canada | HWR and fusion | HWR in Canada | Not found | 100 g | [65] |

| Tritium accidental release into the environment | Time | Release amount (g) | HTO percent | References |
|------------------------------------------------|------|--------------------|-------------|------------|
| SRS (gaseous release) | 1974/5 | 49.64 | 1% | [62,63] |
| | 1975/12 | 18.86 | 0.6% | |
| | 1981/3 | 3.41 | 100% | |
| | 1983/7 | 5.8 | 1% | |
| | 1984/3 | 0.78 | 70% | |
| | 1984/9 | 4.54 | 100% | |
| | 1985/1 | 0.96 | 50% | |
| | 1985/3 | 2.01 | 99.9% | |
| | 1987/7 | 17.83 | 2.7% | |
| | 1988/3 | 2.07 | 15% | |
| | 1988/6 | 0.38 | 4% | |
| | 1988/10 | 0.73 | 10% | |
| | 1988/12 | 0.32 | 99.5% | |
| | 1989/1 | 0.05 | NA | |
| | 1989/3 | 0.11 | 97% | |
| | 1989/10 | 0.08 | 100% | |
| | 1990/2 | 0.01 | 100% | |
| TMI accident | 1979/3 | 0.07 | No data available | [70] |
| Chernobyl accident | 1986/4 | 0.10 (inventory: 3.92) | No data available | [67,71] |
| Fukushima accident | 2011/3 | 0.28–1.40 | 100% | [68,69] |

---

## 4. Characteristics and modeling development for tritium dispersion and environmental migration

### 4.1. Tritium atmospheric dispersion and migration characteristics in the terrestrial system

After released from nuclear facilities, tritium atmospheric dispersion and environmental migration fate (into water & organics cycle) is more special and complex than other radionuclides. The transfer characteristics in the terrestrial system are showed in Fig. 3 and summarized as follows.

(1) **Wet deposition behavior.** In general, wet deposition is usually calculated using a washout coefficient (power function of precipitation intensity, such as \(y = ax^{b}\)) model [72]. The main difference between the deposition behaviors of tritium and other radionuclides depends on the empirical value of a and b. Some scholars performed field experiments to validate a more complex model of HTO scavenging with precipitations from the atmosphere and showed a good agreement [73]. There are also scholars who proposed a numerical Eulerian stationary model to simulate the tritium washout behavior and demonstrated that the washout process was influenced most significantly by rainfall parameters and air temperature [74]. In addition to the wet deposition behavior, tritium could also deposit into the surface soil through dry deposition. There seems no special features attached to tritium except for the dry deposition velocity (about \(4 \times 10^{-5} - 4 \times 10^{-3}~\mathrm{m/s}\) for HT, \(10^{-3} - 10^{-2}~\mathrm{m/s}\) for HTO summarized in IAEA-EMRAS II WG7 report) in contrast to other radionuclides.

(2) **Oxidation behavior of HT in the air and soil.** HT readily oxidizes to form HTO and then enters biological pathways. In the 1980s, several HT release experiments were conducted to explore tritium oxidation and re-emission behaviors at the Chalk River field site in Canada. An effective oxidation rate of 1.5%/h was obtained due to the oxidation behavior of HT in both air and soil [75]. Compared with HT oxidation in the air (~1%/day) [76], the oxidation rate in soil is much larger. In addition, some also performed more detailed experiments to identify the HT oxidation rate in soil under different soil depths, temperatures and soil water contents, respectively [77].

(3) **Re-emission behavior from soil to air.** This was a key process in particular for the radiation dose assessment of HT release source. Numerous studies explored the re-emission of HTO from the soil, assessed the public individual dose and explained the influence of re-emission behavior after HTO or HT release. It has been given that the re-emission rate ranges from 1% to 8.7%/h in a short time and 0.25%-1.5%/h after 48 h [66]. Due to this behavior, under 1 g T (HTO) and 1 g T (HT) accidental releases, the radiation dose exposed by inhalation and skin absorption of HTO release is about 2 orders of magnitude larger than HT release (in fact, the dose conversion factor of HTO is 25000 times of HT) [76,78,79]. For only HTO release, the dose from re-emission exposure is at the same level as the primary exposure (dispersion directly after release). While for only HT release, the dose exposed from the re-emission of HTO (from oxidation of HT deposited in soil) is about 2 orders of magnitude larger than the dose directly exposed from HT in the air. Thus, for the HT release, the radiation dose from HT oxidation and re-emission processes contributes dominantly in the total dose. This kind of phenomenon (important distinction from other radionuclides) explains that the re-emission behavior must not be ignored during the assessment of radiation dose after tritium release.

(4) **Biological metabolism.** HTO could enter plants through the leaf and root uptake and further partly be converted to E-OBT and NE-OBT. Numerous studies were performed to explore the dynamic tritium concentration regarding different types of plants in different stages of plant growth [8,9,80]. With regards to the tritium metabolism in animals and human bodies, a biological half-life of different types of tritium (e.g. TFWT, OBT) was introduced to describe the biological tritium concentration in living organisms. It is relatively well known to us that tritium is uniformly distributed through all biological fluids within 1-2 h and the average half-life of TFWT in humans is about 10 days (the same as water) [81,82]. Large liquid intake (3-4 L/day) could reduce effectively average half-life of TFWT in a human body by a factor of >2 as tritium is easily flushed from the human body. And the biological half-lives are about 40 days for short-term OBT compartment and 350 days for long-term OBT compartment in humans based on carbon turnover in the body [83,84]. For the HT source, only about 0.01% of HT gas inhaled by human is converted to HTO in the body [85]. In addition to the humans, some also explored tritium biological half-lives for non-humans, such as mice (~1.2 days of HTO half-life), sunflower (~20-30 min of TFWT half-life) and so on [9,86]. And there are also some reports declared that the half-life of E-OBT in plants is about 0.5-1.0 day [9]. Overall, it is relatively data-deficient when it comes to the tritium biological half-lives for plants and animals.

> **Fig. 3. Tritium dispersion and environmental migration fate in the terrestrial and aquatic system.**  
> (The figure illustrates the key processes including atmospheric dispersion, dry/wet deposition, HT oxidation, HTO re-emission, plant uptake, food chain transfer, aquatic dispersion, and human exposure pathways.)

### 4.2. Tritium dispersion and migration characteristics in the aquatic system

In contrast to other radionuclides, tritium dispersion and transfer characteristics in the aquatic system are also showed in Fig. 3 and summarized as follows.

(1) **Emission behavior along with water evaporation.** During tritium dispersion in the aquatic system, tritium in surface water would emit into the air along with water evaporation. Previous reports published by the IRSN in France showed that the quantity of tritium transferred from the sea water to the atmosphere in 2002 might be estimated at \(3.9 \times 10^{13}~\mathrm{Bq}\) (the same level to the direct gaseous discharge rate \(6.3 \times 10^{13}~\mathrm{Bq}\)) due to \(1.2 \times 10^{16}~\mathrm{Bq}\) liquid tritium discharge from the La Hague plant [87]. Thus, the tritium evaporation ratio is approximately 0.3% for the La Hague plant case. Our previous work also estimated tritium evaporation rate and cumulative evaporation activity under different water evaporation rates, vertical diffusion coefficients and depths of discharge point. The results showed annual tritium evaporation ratio could reach 2.5% under a conservative dispersion condition such as surface discharge in a reservoir with weak dispersion condition. From the perspective of dose assessment, the evaporation factor might bring an additional radiation dose to both fisherman and residents living in proximity to the discharge region. It is suggested to adopt a deep discharge instead of surface discharge which could greatly decrease the tritium evaporation ratio from the ALARA criterion of radiation protection.

(2) **No absorption behavior by bottom mud.** Other radionuclides such as cesium would be absorbed by the bottom mud meaning that sedimentary and degradation behavior is a matter of concern in the course of the dispersion. However, this behavior doesn't need to be considered for tritium. As an additional feature, tritium infiltration into the deeper geological stratification might need to be considered during the dispersion. Tritium infiltration rate is needed to be identified for the perspectives of both water dispersion behavior and underground water safety.

(3) **Biological metabolism.** Similar to the terrestrial biological metabolism, tritium would also be absorbed by the aquatic lives, such as brown algae, fish, molluscs and shellfish. It was found that aquatic lives would incorporate tritium into their TFWT very rapidly and reach a concentration similar to the external medium [88]. So far, scholars mainly put their eyes on the dynamic OBT concentration in the aquatic organisms [89,90]. Some showed that different kinds of aquatic organisms have different tritium (as OBT) concentration factors due to a heterogeneous distribution of tritium, given an example, mussels has the highest concentration factor compared to algae and fish [91].

### 4.3. Modeling development for tritium environmental migration and impact assessment

Regarding the modeling of tritium atmospheric dispersion and environmental migration in the terrestrial system, previous studies specifically developed several codes with the considerations of the following significant characteristics: wet deposition of HTO during the atmospheric dispersion, oxidation of HT in both the air and soil, reemission of tritium from the soil to air, absorption and metabolism in the plants and animals through the water (hydrogen) & organics cycle [92]. And the typical codes are: NORMTRI and UFOTRI developed by KIT in Germany [78,93], ETMOD developed by Ontario Hydro in Canada [94], CERES developed by French Atomic Energy Commission [95], TERM developed by University of Cambridge in the United Kingdom [96], ACUTRI and SOLVEG developed by JAEA in Japan [79,97], DCART and HotSpot developed by LLNL in USA [98,99], TAS developed by Chinese Academy of Sciences [100], etc. From the codes description, it can be seen that numerous studies have been performed on the modelling of tritium atmospheric dispersion and migration in the terrestrial ecosystem as well as the radiation dose from gaseous tritium discharges. Among the codes, some well-developed models were adopted in particular for normal condition. The atmospheric dispersion behavior could be generally described by Eq. (1). There are several methods to solve the Eq. (1). Almost all codes above mentioned used the Gaussian plume and puff model (an analytic solution) to simulate the atmospheric dispersion of tritium under the normal and accidental release conditions, respectively. This method is still in use today in the environmental impact assessment and also the proposed model from the standards or regulations as the Gaussian method could implement fast computations with a certain degree of acceptable accuracy [101]. In reality, due to the limitation, the Gaussian model could not be used in the large spatial scale such as >20 km (varying meteorological conditions) or complex terrain (mountainous and urban area) situation. Along with the development of computers and significant improvements in computational efficiency, other methods such as CFD were proposed to process the complex and dynamic conditions (could process the complex spatial geometry) [102]. The CFD method could only be used to simulate the atmospheric dispersion in small spatial scale, but unacceptable for the large spatial scale due to the massive computational memory and time. To solve the atmospheric dispersion issue in the large spatial scale, the third-generation air quality modeling system such as CMAQ, CMAx in USA, and REM3 in Germany was developed to be a transport and chemical model based on the atmospheric diffusion and advection equations and the gas-phase chemistry. To perform the calculation, meteorological data must be produced through the specific models such as MMS, RSM in USA. Currently, the air quality modeling system with meteorological model is mainly used to make the real-time weather forecasts and operational air quality impact assessment (aiming at general pollutants such as SO₂, NOₓ) of industrial plants. No researches were reported in the atmospheric dispersion simulation based on the third-generation air quality modeling system in relation to tritium release.

Regarding the modelling of tritium transfer into the plant, the steady-state tritium concentration in the plant was always described by Eq. (2) under normal tritium discharge [103]. The dynamic total tritium concentration in the plant could be described by the classic Eq. (3) when ignoring the conversion of OBT [72]. To solve the Eq. (3), some assumptions should be made as follows: a) the tritium concentration in the air is constant; b) the exchange velocity between atmosphere and plant canopy is constant; c) tritium transfer to soil can be ignored. Under these assumptions, the analytic solution can be obtained and described by Eq. (4). Thus, the tritium migration in different plants depends on the \(k\) value. Eq. (4) gives the dynamic plant response to the steady-state tritium concentration in the air. However, under accidental condition, tritium concentration in the air must be a time-varying value. No studies have been reported regarding available models aiming at this case. In one of our on-going projects, we are performing experimental researches to explore the plant response to the time-varying tritium concentration in the air. Regarding the tritium metabolism in animal & human bodies, the tritium concentration could be determined by combining half-life value and time integration of inhalation, water drinking as well as ingestion. As for the dose assessment, the DCF recommended by the ICRP could be used. In addition, the inhalation rate & water drink rate as well as recipes are available in all the nations around the world. The individual dose could be evaluated finally through the product of DCF and total tritium activity in human body shown in Eq. (5).

\[
\frac{\partial C_a}{\partial t} = D_a \frac{\partial^2 C_a}{\partial x^2} + D_b \frac{\partial^2 C_a}{\partial y^2} + D_c \frac{\partial^2 C_a}{\partial z^2} - u_x \frac{\partial C_a}{\partial x} - u_y \frac{\partial C_a}{\partial y} - u_z \frac{\partial C_a}{\partial z} + E - R - F_d - F_w \quad (1)
\]

\[
C_{p,steady} = \frac{R_h C_{am} + (1 - R_h) C_{sw}}{0.909} \quad (2)
\]

\[
\frac{dC_p}{dt} = \frac{\gamma V_{exc}}{M_w} \left( C_a - \frac{\rho_s C_p}{\beta} \right) + \frac{V_{exc}}{M_w} (\rho_s - \rho) C_s \quad (3)
\]

\[
C_p = C_{p,steady} (1 - e^{-kt}) \quad (4)
\]

\[
\mathrm{Dose} = 1.5 \cdot DCF_{in} \int C_a \cdot R_{in} dt + DCF_{drink} \int C_w \cdot R_{drink} dt + DCF_{ing} \int C_f \cdot R_{ing} dt \quad (5)
\]

where, in Eq. (1), \(C_a\) is the tritium concentration in the air, \(D\) is the matrix of turbulent diffusion coefficients, \(u\) is the wind vector, and the last four terms on the right-hand side (\(E, R, F_d\) and \(F_w\)) represent the source term, radioactive decay, dry and wet deposition, respectively. For some special chemical forms such as HT, the chemical reaction (oxidation of HT in the air) should also be considered; in Eq. (2), \(C_{p,steady}\) is the steady-state tritium concentration in plant, \(R_h\) is the relative humidity, \(C_{am}\) is the tritium concentration in the air moisture, which equates to \(C_a / \rho\) (\(\rho\) is the air humidity at the reference height, as used in Eq. (3)), \(C_{sw}\) is the tritium concentration in the soil water; in Eq. (3), \(C_p\) is the total tritium concentration in plant water, \(\gamma\) is the ratio between tritium exchange velocity and water change velocity (typically 0.95), \(V_{exc}\) is the exchange velocity between the atmosphere and plant canopy, \(M_w\) is the mobile water mass in the leaves per unit soil surface, \(\rho_s\) is the saturated air humidity at the vegetation temperature, \(C_s\) is the tritium concentration in the sap water, resulting from water extraction by roots at different depths, \(\beta\) is the isotope fractionation between tritium and hydrogen (typically 1.1); in Eq. (4), \(k\) is the constant rate for tritium uptake, \(t\) is the time after the beginning of the exposure; in Eq. (5), Dose is the radiation dose exposed with tritium, 1.5 is the weighting factor considering both inhalation and skin absorption factor, DCF is the dose conversion factor, \(\int C\cdot Rdt\) is the tritium intake amount.

Regarding the modeling of tritium dispersion and transfer in the aquatic system, few researches specifically considered the tritium characteristics mentioned above. For the general water dispersion without distinction between tritium and other radionuclides in the aquatic system, the following models were developed: SEA-GEARN by JAEA in Japan [104], LORAS by Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute [105], SisBaHiA by Federal University of Rio de Janeiro in Brazil [106], POSEIDON and THREETOX in Ukraine [107], Box model in Norway [108], USEV-2/3D in Spain [109], etc. Most of the above works on tritium or the general radionuclides dispersion and transfer in both the terrestrial and aquatic systems were presented and summarized in the frame of IAEA Programme, such as the EMRAS I: 2003-2007 and EMRAS II: 2009-2011 Programme, as well as the MODARIA I: 2012-2015 and MODARIA II: since 2016 Programme [72,110,111]. From the codes description, it can be seen that the studies on the modeling of tritium dispersion and migration due to liquid tritium discharge were seldom reported in previous literatures. One of the main reasons may lie in that it is relatively easy to control and manage the liquid tritium discharge in contrast to gaseous tritium discharge, and the ingestion of aquatic products is regarded as the only exposure pathway under the condition of liquid discharge from the previous understanding [6]. This was correct for the general radionuclides such as the radioactive metal particles, but not for tritium. Tritium in the aquatic environment could emit into the air along with water evaporation [112]. Furthermore, the evaporated tritium in the air could be transported to the terrestrial ecosystem through the atmospheric dispersion. Once the evaporated tritium was inhaled by human body, an additional radiation dose should be considered. In reality, the Fukushima accident also gave us the lessons that it is more difficult to remove tritium than other radionuclides, and it is greatly debatable to discharge tritium directly into the aquatic system [11]. Thus, more attention should be paid to the tritium dispersion and transfer behaviors in the aquatic system in the future studies.

---

## 5. Radiation dose in relation to tritium exposure

### 5.1. Exposure pathways

After discharge into the environment, the possible exposure pathways of radiation dose to a person include the following contents. As a pure beta emitter of low energy ~18.6 keV, the maximum track length of electrons emitted from tritium is 6 μm in water or biological tissue. It is well known that the thickness of the epidermis and dermis of human skin are 20-100 μm and 1-3 mm respectively [80]. Thus, the external exposure of tritium would not inflict damage on humans. But the tritium radiation from internal exposure could not be ignored. Three basic exposure pathways can be identified and showed in Fig. 3: inhalation & skin absorption, ingestion and water drinking. A person could be exposed through inhalation & skin-absorption of tritium in the air due to atmosphere dispersion of tritium from directly gaseous discharge of the nuclear facilities, reemission from the surface soil and evaporation from the surface water. A person could also be exposed through ingestion of tritiated pollution food which includes terrestrial products (vegetable, fruit, meat, eggs, milk etc.) and aquatic products (aquatic plants, fish, shellfish etc.). The third exposure pathway is through drinking tritiated water (underground water, lake water, river water, mountain spring water etc.). Apart from the tritium exposure pathways mentioned above, it is worth noting again that the atmosphere dispersion of tritium evaporated from water brings an additional possible exposure pathway.

### 5.2. Dose comparison of various exposure pathways under normal discharge

According to the above exposure pathways and previous tritium dispersion and environmental migration codes, the individual dose under a special environmental condition was estimated and showed in Table 4. The unit gram tritium discharge was selected as most of the tritium discharges from the current nuclear facilities were below or close to this value. The wind speed and atmosphere stability class were assumed to be 5 m/s and D, respectively. The stack height of 58 m referred to the stack design of ITER. Under this condition, the results showed that the total individual dose is around 61.5 μSv/a which is lower than the general public dose limit 1 mSv/a recommended by the ICRP and the public dose limit (0.1-0.3 mSv/a) of NPPs and NFCFs in various nations [113]. Among the exposure pathways, ingestion of terrestrial products contributes most (74%) to the total dose, followed by the inhalation & skin-absorption of gaseous discharge and water drinking (all were assumed from the polluted underground water). It is worth noting that the inhalation & skin-absorption dose of tritium evaporated from the aquatic system to a person close to the shore might be 1.16 μSv/a under the condition of tritium discharge point in the surface water, and the water evaporation rate of 9.55 mm/d (assuming the wind speed of 5 m/s, air temperature of 30°C and relative humidity of 50%). Of course, the dose of evaporation could be greatly decreased through setting the position of tritium discharge in the aquatic system as deep as possible. Attentions should be still paid to some special conditions and NPP sites at which dose of tritium evaporation might be larger than that of ingestion of aquatic products. This indeed always caused great attention in previous studies.

**Table 4. Radiation dose of various exposure pathways due to tritium discharge from the nuclear facilities.**

| Property | Value (units) |
|----------|---------------|
| Tritium (HTO) discharge | Gaseous: 1 g/a; Liquid: 1 g/a |
| Wind speed | 5 m/s |
| Atmosphere stability class | D |
| Stack height | 58 m |
| HTO deposition velocity | 0.018 m/s |
| Person | Adult of China |

| Exposure pathways | Dose (μSv/a) | Percent (%) |
|-------------------|--------------|-------------|
| Inhalation & skin-absorption (gaseous) | 11.6 | 18.9 |
| Inhalation & skin-absorption (evaporation) | 1.16 | 1.9 |
| Ingestion (terrestrial products) | 45.5 | 74.0 |
| Ingestion (aquatic products) | Negligible | — |
| Water drinking | 3.2 | 5.2 |
| **Total** | **61.5** | **100** |

> a The percent of inhalation and ingestion originates from the results given by DCART code developed by the LLNL in the USA. Just as the description in the previous part, the DCART code also gave a HT release having a 1%-10% dose impact compared with HTO. And the exposure of a HT release mainly comes from HTO converted in soil [98].  
> b The data originates from individual dose assessment for gaseous and liquid tritium discharged from Wolsong NPP in Korea in the year of 2015 [6].

### 5.3. Individual dose due to unit gram tritium accidental release

The previous part discussed the radiation dose under normal operation. Numerous scholars gave many dose results with very small differences (usually at the same order of magnitude). This is mainly due to the undifferentiated environmental factors (usually considering the meteorological condition with high-frequency or the practical condition) used in the calculations. However, this is not the case for an accidental condition as any meteorological conditions might appear during a tritium release accident. In addition, uncertainties of accidental codes are much higher than normal code. Magnitude differences of the results would be observed due to the different meteorological conditions by scholars and the uncertainties of accidental codes [92]. Some performed sensitivity analyses of the meteorological factors to explore the differences and get the relative conservative factors [114,115]. They are instantaneous release source, F atmospheric stability, 0.3 m/s of wind speed and no rain for the dose assessment of 1000 m of downwind distance. Under this condition, the individual early dose might reach 20 mSv and 0.23 mSv for unit gram HTO and HT accidental release, respectively. In addition, under another meteorological condition, radiation dose (including both inhalation and ingestion exposure pathways) assessment results are also showed in Table 5 due to unit gram tritium accidental release. The total individual dose is only 2.13 mSv for 1 g HTO release, which is about dozens to hundred times larger than that of 1 g HT release. And the ingestion pathway still contributes most (around 80%) to the total dose just like that under the normal condition.

**Table 5. Radiation dose of various exposure pathways due to tritium accidental release from the nuclear facility.**

| Property | Value (units) |
|----------|---------------|
| Tritium (HTO) discharge | Gaseous: 1 g/a; Liquid: 1 g/a |
| Wind speed | 0.3 m/s |
| Atmospheric stability | B |
| Stack height | 10 m |
| HTO deposition velocity | 0.018 m/s |
| Downwind distance | 500 m |

| Exposure pathways (HTO release) | Dose (mSv) | Percent (%) |
|--------------------------------|------------|-------------|
| Inhalation & skin-absorption | 0.401 | 19.14 |
| Ingestion (terrestrial products) | 1.733 | 80.86 |
| Evaporation (liquid) | Much smaller | No |
| **Total** | **2.134** | **100** |

> a The data originates from the results in downwind distance of 600 m given by UFOTRI code developed by the KIT in Germany [78].

### 5.4. Lessons for tritium accidental consequences of fusion reactor

With respect to previous severe nuclear accidents, the consequences were catastrophic. While this was mainly due to the release of huge amount of fission products such as I, Cs and Pu. The radiation dose in relation to tritium release was relatively small as the inventory is just gram level. However, it would be quite different for the future fusion reactor as tritium inventory in a fusion reactor would be 3 orders of magnitude larger than a PWR NPP. Taking tritium distribution in the VV of ITER for example, a safety limit of 1 kg tritium was specifically set up as the maximum mobile inventory from the consideration of achieving "no-evacuation" objective [116]. Noting that most of the retained tritium distributes in beryllium dust and co-deposited layers apart from the tritium pumped by the vacuum pump (150-180 g) and injected by the fueling system (46.2 g). For the next fusion reactors after ITER, such as CFETR, EU-DEMO, some also proposed to set the same value to limit mobile tritium inventory as possible as they could though the safety limit on tritium has not been officially confirmed [117]. It should be noted that the 1 kg tritium limit could still be reached (10000-50000 discharges) even if all tungsten was used as plasma faced materials with a lower tritium permission rate (ITER would adopt beryllium with a higher tritium permission rate as the first wall and tungsten as the divertor) [118]. If none of the safety limits was adopted to the future fusion reactor, the maximum mobile tritium inventory might be higher than 1 kg in the VV. Thus, whether or not a tritium safety limit is set up for future fusion reactors, it is very likely that a fusion reactor owns a significant tritium inventory in contrast to a fission NPP and tritium laboratory (except for the field of nuclear weapon such as the SRS which owned a same level tritium inventory as in a fusion reactor and also released large amount of tritium into the environment in many accidents) according to the current knowledge.

According to IAEA, the public evacuation measure should be taken if the radiation dose to individual was larger than 100 mSv in the first 7 days [119]. While for ITER, the threshold value was decreased to 50 mSv [120]. This means even under the worst imaginable sequence of events from internal or identified external origins, the design and operation of ITER protects the public to such a degree that there is no technical justification for the dependence on public evacuation as a backup. A preliminary safety report of ITER submitted to ASN described 13 kinds of BDBAs. The worst case named "wet bypass" means the multiple failure of first wall cooling loops inside vacuum vessel together with failure of both windows in a Radio Frequency heating line. The definition of initiating event and consequences could be found in the reference [116]. About 1.06 g tritium and 62.6 g dust would be released into the environment under the safety limit for source. It was estimated the early dose for most exposed individual at 200 m would be 4 mSv below the threshold value of no-evacuation.

Achievement of the no-evacuation objective above would be largely due to the undamaged confinement barrier of tokamak building. While from another viewpoint, previous severe accidents happened in the fission NPPs gave us lessons again and again that the severe accidents (failure of all confinements) and large radioactive release could appear beyond our imagination during the development of nuclear energy systems. Given an example, from the perspective of NPP design and our expectations, the occurrence frequency of a large radioactive release proposed by INSAG should follow the objectives: \(10^{-5}\) and \(10^{-6}\) per reactor-year for existing and future plants [121]. INES level 6 and 7 accidents mean a significant and major release of radioactive materials. Thus, the frequency of occurrence should be at least lower than \(10^{-5} - 10^{-6}\) per reactor-year with respect to a level 7 nuclear accident from this definition. In reality, the level 7 accidents have appeared twice during the 18530 reactor-year operation till the June 2020. This means the occurrence frequency of a level 7 accident is higher than \(10^{-4}\) per reactor-year. Some also predicted that a Fukushima-like accident or an even more serious nuclear accident would have a 50% chance to occur every 60-150 years based on the statistical risk analysis [122]. Thus, it is necessary to identify the potential consequences with regard to a postulated large radioactivity release due to destroying both of the confinements (first: VV and its extensions, second: tokamak building) for an ITER-like fusion reactor as long as a large inventory exists in the reactor from the perspective of radiation protection. A flux diagram to explain this logic was showed in Fig. 4.

> **Fig. 4. The principal lessons for fusion learned from the previous three severe nuclear accidents.**  
> (The figure illustrates the TMI, Chernobyl and Fukushima accidents and their implications for fusion reactor safety, particularly regarding confinement integrity and tritium release.)

Once both of the confinements failed, tritium can easily escape and can be released into the environment as tritium belongs to elements gaseous or extremely volatile under thermochemical conditions of normal operation (just like the noble gases in the fission accidents: almost all of the noble gases >90% were released into the atmosphere during the Chernobyl and Fukushima accidents) [123]. Aiming at this case, some performed assessment of environmental impact and individual dose for the future fusion reactors [124]. And the results showed that the public individual dose might reach 20 Sv (HTO release) or 230 mSv (HT release) when assuming without any nuclear emergency measures under the conservative meteorological condition. The 1 kg tritium release corresponds to a level 6 accident in INES. From this viewpoint, it would pose a new and unprecedented challenge for tritium safety of future fusion reactors. The following issues should be answered before the operation of the fusion system: How to minimize the mobile tritium inventory in the VV? How to control tritium discharge, and to achieve practical elimination of the massive tritium release? And how to consider the fusion nuclear emergency so as to ensure tritium safety of the future fusion system. These should be significant concerns during the fusion energy development.

---

## 6. Health effects in relation to tritium exposure

Linking human health effects specifically to radiation dose is always a significant issue that caused concerns. Numerous scientific committees, such as the ICRP, the UNSCEAR, the IAEA, the WHO and scholars reported the possible human health effects caused by radiation dose. A consensus has been reached that the death would appear before the cancers when the acute dose is larger than 2 Sv (death rate 100% for a >8 Sv dose) according to the IAEA report [125]. Under the lethal dose threshold value (<2 Sv), there is no doubt that a relationship (always regarding as linear such as the relationship showed in Fig. 5) exist between excess health risk (cancers) and acute radiation dose at dose greater than 100 mSv (or dose rate of 5 mSv/h from the epidemiological studies) [126,127]. However, it is very debatable whether a lower acute dose (<100 mSv) or dose rate (<5 mSv/h, averaged over an hour) could pose a cancer risk [128]. Some found none of the negative health effects (hard to observe from the individual viewpoint) while some gave the evidences on the increased health effects by low dose (report an increasing cancer incidence among the residents near to the NPP site from the Medline database) based on the epidemiological data of the atomic bomb survivors, medical exposure studies and follow-up studies after nuclear accidents [129-131]. Based on this, several kinds of possible viewpoints showed in Fig. 5 were proposed [132,133]. At the current time, a LNT model was used for radiation protection purpose to help set dose limits based on predicted risks for a given dose [134]. After that, some misused the LNT model to assess the excess cancer risks among the public around the NPP site under normal operation. In recent years, it comes to a consensus that the LNT model should not be used to predict cancer risk for a few individuals or for low dose exposures. The above has been widely accepted and showed in Fig. 5 to explain the general relationship between health effects and radiation dose which doesn't distinguish between tritium and other radionuclides (a general perspective including tritium).

> **Fig. 5. Widely accepted model of health effects in relation to radiation dose proposed by IAEA and the academia [125,132,133].**  
> (The figure illustrates the LNT model, threshold model, and hormesis model for radiation-induced health effects, with the dose range of interest for tritium exposure indicated.)

Regarding the health effects specifically in relation to tritium exposure, it is difficult to assess the related health risks as few studies have direct information on tritium exposures since it was used and tritium exposure in the existing studies belongs to low dose exposure in general [135]. From the literature searching results using the keywords of health effect and tritium in Web of Science, only a total number of 1022 articles and 20 articles per year were published in past years. In reality, most of these articles are irrelevant with the health effects in relation to tritium exposure. Among these studies, some scholars at seven institutions in Japan initiated a collaborative project to explore a novel approach by combining cell biological/molecular biological analysis with high throughput bioinformatics analysis so as to identify the stochastic effect from low level tritium radiation because of the increasing amounts of tritiated polluted water accumulating at the site of the Fukushima NPP [136]. Using the hypersensitive system developed under the above collaborative project, it was pointed out that no significant change in mutation frequency by HTO was observed in the range of dose rates 0.05-2.0 cGy/h, whereas clear reverse dose rate effects were observed in the case of fission neutrons. In addition, exposure to a certain level of HTO could enhance the spontaneous mutagenesis. In conclusion, they gave that the value should be much lower than 12 mGy/day if there is a threshold dose rate for somatic mutation induction by tritium radiation [137]. Some studies in Canada estimated the cancer risk in relation to tritium exposure from routine operation of a nuclear-generating station (HWR) in Pickering, Ontario, and gave a conclusion that tritium estimates were not associated with increased risk of radiation-sensitive cancers in Pickering [138]. Study at the University of Manchester in the UK also investigated an incidence rate of leukaemia among young children from exposure to tritium in the discharges of German NPPs and in the fallout from atmospheric nuclear weapons testing. The results showed no evidence of a markedly increased risk of leukaemia in young children [139]. Another international collaborative studies by IRSN in France and CRNL, Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission & University of Ottawa in Canada carried out an in vivo animal study to estimate health risk due to exposure to low levels of tritium in drinking water. This study gave some evidences on such as the similarity of the biokinetics of HTO and OBT and the higher biological effectiveness of OBT. And this study also gave that it is unlikely to predict the health outcomes just using the in vitro method in their studies. A large-scale collaborative in vivo studies utilizing the large spectrum of available biological methodologies are needed [140]. The IRSN and CRNL also studied the tritium effects on fish health in a field setting when exposed to a tritium concentration ranging from 2 to 23000 Bq/L. They found tritium exposure increased DNA damages and induced changes in fatty acids of minnows and tritium also increased the responses of the immune, neural and antioxidant systems [141,142]. Some studies in the UK estimated chromosome aberrations in workers occupationally exposed to tritium based on an historical chromosome analysis. They found that the dicentric frequency per cell was significantly raised and an unexpected increase appeared in aberration frequency in the tritium workers. However, they also pointed out that the available historical tritium dose records are subject to considerable uncertainty [143]. In addition, there are also some scholars who claimed that tritium could be incorporated into DNA and hence bring potentially high toxicity, while some also conducted an extensive research and found that the relative biological effectiveness of tritium is not so different from that of gamma emissions [144]. Also some gave a direct relation between risk of leukaemia and tritium exposure. This study is less persuasive due to the small numbers of cases and controls in the exposed group [145].

In a word, it is widely accepted that the radiation dose in relation to tritium exposure could cause DNA damages and other biological molecules even at a low level radiation dose while there is no evidence of a markedly increased cancers risk in relation to low dose tritium exposure which might benefit from the self-repairing mechanism from the individual and group perspective. Thus, it is still under debate whether low level tritium radiation could be negative to human health through the past researches by lack of tritium-specific dose data, low dose and small numbers of cases. Related studies are still being conducted and also the fusion energy development might accelerate the researches on health effects of tritium exposure.

---

## 7. Conclusion

As a special and dominant radionuclide, tritium has caused significant concerns from the scientific community, regulators and even the public. The ambitious researches and the rapid development of fusion energy further promote the concern about tritium safety as existing NPPs have orders of magnitude lower tritium inventories than ITER or FPP. Existing facilities with comparable tritium inventory exist only in the field of nuclear weapons. Tritium discharge is a comprehensive issue involving social and economic factors. In this work, a comprehensive review on tritium discharge, environmental behavior and health effects was provided from various aspects including tritium production, inventory, regulatory discharge and accidental release, public individual dose due to both gaseous and liquid discharge under the normal and accidental conditions, as well as the health effects of tritium exposure. The following conclusions can be drawn on the basis of this review.

(1) **Tritium production, inventory and discharge:** Apart from the military production by irradiating lithium, tritium is mainly produced as an adjunct during the operation of the commercial HWRs. A rough estimation considering both civilian and military tritium production shows that the USA, Russia and Canada possibly own tens of kilograms tritium. Europe and other nations such as India, South Korea and China own several kilograms tritium. It is expected that the commercial tritium production will peak (around 5 kg/a) in the 2020s as most of HWRs constructed in the 1980s would be decommissioned after the 2030s. A range from gram to kilogram tritium would distribute in different nuclear facilities. Various types of limits have been set up for tritium discharge of nuclear facilities from the regulatory viewpoint. The real tritium discharge from various nuclear facilities including spent fuel reprocessing plant changes from several TBq to tens of PBq per year. ITER as the first fusion reactor will have true practices on tritium discharge, which will be controlled at the same level as the fission NPP. Tritium discharge limits are still under discussion to reach a consensus among the regulator, the operator and the public for the next fusion reactor after ITER. Large tritium inventory in the future fusion system would pose a new and unprecedented challenge on tritium confinement and discharge compared with current fission NPP and tritium laboratory (noting that tritium inventory in SRS serving as military purpose is comparable with fusion reactor and many accidental releases also appeared).

(2) **Tritium dispersion and migration characteristics & modeling:** Several significant characteristics were identified including wet deposition of HTO, oxidation of HT in both air and soil, re-emission of tritium from the soil to air, emission of HTO along with water evaporation, absorption and metabolism in the plant & animal & human body through the water (hydrogen) & organics cycle. Many tritium migration models in the terrestrial ecosystem have been specifically developed and validated with consideration of tritium characteristics. While current researches on dispersion and transfer in water failed to identify the tritium characteristics in contrast to other radionuclides. It is a remarkable fact that some features were ignored such as tritium emission along with water evaporation. For the first time, this review proposed that this new pathway of tritium emission from the water into the air along with water evaporation should be added as one of the significant pathways during the assessment of tritium concentration in various environmental sub-systems and radiation dose to a person in the synthetic system. And it is suggested that more attention should be paid to the tritium dispersion and transfer behavior in the aquatic system in the future studies.

(3) **Radiation dose assessment:** Under normal operation, tritium is a very significant contributor to the total release of radioactivity from NPPs in particular of HWRs. Radiation doses due to various exposure pathways were assessed and compared to identify the key pathways due to tritium discharge from the nuclear facility. Under normal operation, the maximum individual dose is about tens of μSv/a which is much lower than the dose limit (ICRP: 1 mSv/a, NPPs and NFCs in different nations: 0.1-0.3 mSv/a). Under the accidental condition, magnitude differences of the calculated dose results could appear for the same tritium release scenario because of the different meteorological conditions and considerable uncertainties of accidental codes. It seems that tritium release is not a significant issue (tritium inventory in fission reactor is relative small, gram level) compared with other key radionuclides (cesium, iodine, etc.) during a nuclear accident of the fission NPP. This has been proved again and again by the Chernobyl and Fukushima accidents. However, although the "no-evacuation" objective is expected to achieve for a fusion reactor in theory, it is still suggested to pay great attention to the possibility of large amount of tritium release under hypothetical accidents, in particular under the condition of destroying all confinements (even the failure of penetration piece), as tritium belongs to elements gaseous or extremely volatile under thermochemical conditions of normal operation, and easily escaped and released into the atmosphere (just like the noble gases in the fission accidents. Almost >90% noble gases were released into the atmosphere during the unexpected Chernobyl and Fukushima accidents).

(4) **Health effects of tritium exposure:** It has reached a consensus that the death would appear before the cancers when the acute dose is larger than 2 Sv (death rate 100% for a >8 Sv dose), and a relationship (always regard as linear) exists between excess health risk (cancers) and acute radiation dose at dose greater than 100 mSv (or dose rate of 5 mSv/h) but below 2 Sv. While at a low dose (<100 mSv), various viewpoints were proposed and under debate. Among them, the LNT model was used for radiation protection purposes to help set dose limits based on predicted risks for a given dose, but should not be used to predict cancer risk for a few individuals or low dose exposures. Regarding the health effects in relation to tritium exposure, it is widely accepted that tritium exposure could cause damage to DNA and other biological molecules even at a low level radiation dose, while there is no evidence of a markedly increased cancers risk in relation to low dose tritium exposure, which might benefit from the self-repairing mechanism from the individual and group perspective. Thus, it is still under debate whether low level tritium radiation could be negative to human health through the past researches in the lack of tritium-specific dose data, low dose and small numbers of cases. Related studies are still being conducted and also the fusion energy development might accelerate the researches on health effects of tritium exposure.

---

## Credit author statement

**Baojie Nie**: Conceptualization, Investigation, Writing - original draft.  
**Sheng Fang**: Investigation, Writing - review and editing.  
**Man Jiang, Laishun Wang, Muyi Ni and Jiye Zheng**: Writing - review and editing.  
**Zhiyi Yang**: Data curation, Writing - review and editing.  
**Fengchen Li**: Supervision, Writing - review and editing.

---

## Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

---

## Acknowledgements

This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 11905305) and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant No. 2019T120769, 2018M640856). We also thank two unnamed referees for their valuable comments and all authors of references cited in this work.

---

## References

[1] Kharecha P, Hansen J. Prevented mortality and greenhouse gas emissions from historical and projected nuclear power. *Environ Sci Technol* 2013;47:4889-95.  
[2] Jang Y, Park E. Social acceptance of nuclear power plants in Korea: the role of public perceptions following the Fukushima accident. *Renew Sustain Energy Rev* 2020;128:109894.  
[3] Yorucu V, Katircioglu S. Radioactive convergence of nuclear leakage in Fukushima: economic impact analysis of triple tragic events. *Renew Sustain Energy Rev* 2014;35:400-9.  
[4] He G, Mol A, Zhang L, Lu Y. Public participation and trust in nuclear power development in China. *Renew Sustain Energy Rev* 2013;23:1-11.  
[5] Vasyanovich M, Vasilyev A, Ekidin A, Kapustin I, Kryshev A. Special monitoring results for determination of radionuclide composition of Russian NPP atmospheric releases. *Nucl Eng Technol* 2019;51:1176-9.  
[6] Kong T, Kim S, Lee Y, Son J, Maeng S. Radioactive effluents released from Korean nuclear power plants and the resulting radiation doses to members of the public. *Nucl Eng Technol* 2017;49:1772-7.  
[7] Zhou H, Liu H, Wang L, Yang X, Oya Y, Zhao M, et al. A tritium permeation 'short cut' for plasma-facing components of fusion reactors. *Nucl Fusion* 2019;59:014003.  
[8] Eyrolle F, Ducros L, Dizes S, Beaugein-Seiller K, Charmasson S, Boyer P, et al. An updated review on tritium in the environment. *J Environ Radioact* 2018;181:128-37.  
[9] Goff P, Fromm M, Vichot L, Badot P, Guetat P. Isotopic fractionation of tritium in biological systems. *Environ Int* 2014;65:116-26.  
[10] Normile D. The trouble with tritium. *Science* 2014;346:1278.  
[11] Conca J. It's really ok if Japan dumps radioactive Fukushima water into the ocean. https://www.forbes.com/sites/jamesconca/2019/09/12/its-really-ok-if-japan-dumps-radioactive-fukushima-water-into-the-ocean/#46c8e267b298.  
[12] Wu Y, Chen Z, Hu L, Jin M, Li Y, Jiang J, et al. Identification of safety gaps for fusion demonstration reactors. *Nat Energy* 2016;1:16154.  
[13] Pawelko R, Cadwallader L, Shimada M. Safety and tritium applied research facility annual atmospheric tritium emissions. *Fusion Sci Technol* 2019;75:18-23.  
[14] Wu Y, Chen Z, Meng Z, Hu L, Vicente S, Merrill B, et al. Summary of the 2nd international workshop on environmental, safety and economic aspects of fusion power. *Nucl Fusion* 2018;58:097001.  
[15] IAEA. Power reactor information system. https://pris.iaea.org/pris/.  
[16] IAEA. Energy, electricity and nuclear power estimates for the period up to 2050. 2019.  
[17] Bigot B. Progress toward ITER's first plasma. *Nucl Fusion* 2019;59:112001.  
[18] Wan Y, Li J, Liu Y, Wang X, Chan V, Chen C, et al. Overview of the present progress and activities on the CFETR. *Nucl Fusion* 2017;57:102009.  
[19] Kessel C, Blanchard J, Davis A, El-Guebaly L, Garrison L, Ghoniem N, et al. Overview of the fusion nuclear science facility, a credible break-in-step on the path to fusion energy. *Fusion Eng Des* 2018;135:236-70.  
[20] Federici G, Bachmann C, Barucca L, Baylard C, Biel W, Boccaccini L, et al. Overview of the DEMO staged design approach in Europe. *Nucl Fusion* 2019;59:066013.  
[21] Tobita K, Hiwatari R, Utoh H, Miyoshi Y, Asakura N, Sakamoto Y, et al. Overview of the DEMO conceptual design activity in Japan. *Fusion Eng Des* 2018;136:1024-31.  
[22] Kim K, Im K, Kim H, Oh S, Park J, Kwon S, et al. Design concept of K-DEMO for near-term implementation. *Nucl Fusion* 2015;55:053027.  
[23] EUROfusion. European research roadmap to the realization of fusion energy. 2018.  
[24] Michel R. Tritium inventories of the world oceans and their implications. *Nature* 1976;263:103-6.  
[25] Oms P, Bois P, Dumas F, Lazure P, Morillon M, Voiseux C, et al. Inventory and distribution of tritium in the oceans in 2016. *Sci Total Environ* 2019;656:1289-303.  
[26] Hoffmann W, Kebesay R, Firbas P. Introduction to the verification regime of the comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty. *Phys Earth Planet In* 1999;113:5-9.  
[27] Kovari M, Coleman M, Cristescu I, Smith R. Tritium resources available for fusion reactors. *Nucl Fusion* 2018;58:026010.  
[28] Pearson R, Antoniazzi A, Nuttall W. Tritium supply and use: a key issue for the development of nuclear fusion energy. *Fusion Eng Des* 2018;136:1140-8.  
[29] SIPRI. Yearbook 2020: armaments, disarmament and international security. 2020.  
[30] Laversin J, Gottsche M, Glaser A. Nuclear archaeology to distinguish plutonium and tritium production modes in heavy-water reactors. *Sci Global Secur* 2018;26:70-90.  
[31] Jones G. 1948-1988. In: History of U.S. production of tritium; 2017.  
[32] Burns K, Love E, Thornhill C. Description of the tritium-producing burnable absorber rod for the commercial light water reactor. 2012.  
[33] Bukharin O. Downsizing Russia's nuclear warhead production infrastructure. *Nonproliferation Rev* 2001;8:116-30.  
[34] Ahn H, Kim T, Park S, Baik M, Choi Y, Park J, et al. Tritium distribution in the low-level and intermediate-level wastes of a Korean CANDU reactor. *Fusion Sci Technol* 2020;76:596-9.  
[35] Son S, Lee S, Kim K. Tritium production, recovery and application in Korea. *Appl Radiat Isot* 2009;67:1336-40.  
[36] Stefan L, Tratnea N, Bornea A, Zamfirache M, Bidica N, Stefan I. Cernavoda tritium removal facility: a key tritium supplier for future fusion facilities. *Fusion Eng Des* 2019;146:1505-9.  
[37] Peterson Jr H, Baker D. Tritium production, releases and population doses at nuclear power reactors. *Fusion Technol* 1985;8:2544-50.  
[38] Hou X. Tritium and \(^{14}\mathrm{C}\) in the environment and nuclear facilities: sources and analytical methods. *J Nucl Fuel Cycle Waste Technol* 2018;16:11-39.  
[39] Nie B, Ran G, Zeng Q, Du H, Li Z, Chen Y, et al. Insights into fuel start-up and self-sufficiency for fusion energy: the case of CFETR. *Energy Sci Eng* 2019;7:457-68.  
[40] Giancristi L, Ahn M, Bonnett I, Boyer C, Chaudhuri P, Davis W, et al. ITER 15M program and associated system engineering. *Fusion Eng Des* 2018;136:815-21.  
[41] Merola M, Escourbica F, Raffray A, Chappuis P, Hirai T, Gicquel S, et al. Engineering challenges and development of the ITER blanket system and divertor. *Fusion Eng Des* 2015;96-97:34-41.  
[42] Houtte D, Okayama K, Sagot F. ITER operational availability and fluence objectives. *Fusion Eng Des* 2011;86:680-3.  
[43] Abdou M, Morley N, Smolentsev S, Ying A, Malang S, Rowcliffe A, et al. Blanket/first wall challenges and required R&D on the pathway to DEMO. *Fusion Eng Des* 2015;100:2-43.  
[44] Cristescu IR, Cristescu I, Doerr L, Glugla M, Murdoch D. Tritium inventories and tritium safety design principles for the fuel cycle of ITER. *Nucl Fusion* 2007;47:S458-63.  
[45] Day C, Butler B, Giegerich T, Ploeckl B, Varoutis S. A smart three-loop fuel cycle architecture for DEMO. *Fusion Eng Des* 2019;146:2462-8.  
[46] Nie B, Jiang M, Ni M, Li F. Preliminary environmental radiation considerations for CFETR. *Fusion Eng Des* 2019;140:16-22.  
[47] Perrault D. Nuclear safety aspects on the road towards fusion energy. *Fusion Eng Des* 2019;146:130-4.  
[48] IAEA. Management of waste containing tritium and carbon-14. 2004.  
[49] IAEA. Regulatory control of radioactive discharges to the environment. 2018.  
[50] Ministry of Ecology and Environment of the People's Republic of China. Regulations for environmental radiation protection of nuclear power plant. 2011. GB 6249-2011.  
[51] OSPAR. French implementation report of PARCOM recommendation 91/4 on radioactive discharges. 2019.  
[52] U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission. Consolidated guidance: 10 CFR Part 20- standards for protection against radiation. 2001. NUREG-1736.  
[53] Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission. Radioactive release data from Canadian nuclear generating stations 1994 to 2003. 2005. INFO-0210/REV.12.  
[54] Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission. Process for establishing release limits and action levels at nuclear facilities. 2012. Discussion paper DIS-12-02.  
[55] Son J, Kim H, Kong T, Ko J, Lee G. Radiological effluents released and public doses from nuclear power plants in Korea. *Radiat Protect Dosim* 2013;155:517-21.  
[56] Jannik G, Stagich B, Dixon K. Radiological impact of 2018 operations at the Savannah River site. 2019.  
[57] Schneider M, Marignac Y. Spent nuclear fuel reprocessing in France. 2008.  
[58] Yang D, Chen X, Li B. Tritium release during nuclear power operation in China. *J Radiol Prot* 2012;32:167-73.  
[59] Yang J, Li Y, Wang Y, Wang M, Zhao Y. Benchmarking study on radioactive effluents released by nuclear power plants of the world. *Environ Sci Manag* 2017;42:127-32.  
[60] Welte S, Besserer U, Osenberg D, Wendel J. Tritium Laboratory Karlsruhe: administrative and technical framework for isotope laboratory operation. *Fusion Sci Technol* 2015;67:635-8.  
[61] Kurata R, Yamada M, Suzuki T, Nakamura H, Iwai Y, Isobe K, et al. Operational experience of tritium handling facilities in the Japan Atomic Energy Agency's tritium process laboratory. *Fusion Sci Technol* 2017;71:687-92.  
[62] Murphy Jr C, Bauer L, Hoel D. Tritium atmospheric transport and deposition following acute releases - comparisons with a simple transport model. *Fusion Technol* 1992;21:489-93.  
[63] Pan P, Rigdon L. Tritium oxidation in atmospheric transport. 1996. LA-UR-96-2953.  
[64] Tesch C, Carlson R, Michelotti R, Rogers M, Willms S. Tritium systems test assembly (TSTA) stabilization. *Fusion Sci Technol* 2005;48:258-61.  
[65] Winfield D J, Miller J. Safety analysis for the CRL tritium laboratory. *Fusion Technol* 1995;28:995-9.  
[66] Burnham C D, Brown R M, Ogram G L, Spencer F S. An overview of experiments at Chalk River on HT dispersion in the environment. *Fusion Technol* 1988;14:1159-64.  
[67] Koga T, Morishima H, Niwa T, Kawai H. Tritium precipitation in European cities and in Osaka, Japan owing to the Chernobyl nuclear accident. *J Radiat Res* 1991;32:267-76.  
[68] Takahata N, Tomonaga Y, Kumamoto Y, Yamada M, Sano Y. Direct tritium emissions to the ocean from the Fukushima Dai-ichi nuclear accident. *Geochem J* 2018;52:211-7.  
[69] Povinec P, Aoyama M, Biddulph D, Breier R, Buessler K, Chang C, et al. Cesium, iodine and tritium in NW Pacific waters - a comparison of the Fukushima impact with global fallout. *Biogeosciences* 2013;10:5481-96.  
[70] Tritiated Water Task Force. Tritiated water task force report. 2016.  
[71] Kirchner G, Noack C. Core history and nuclide inventory of the Chernobyl core at the time of accident. *Nucl Saf* 1988;29:1-5.  
[72] IAEA. Transfer of tritium in the environment after accidental releases from nuclear facilities, report of working group 7 tritium accidents of EMRAS II topical heading approaches for assessing emergency situations. 2014. IAEA-TECDOC-1738.  
[73] Piskunov V, Golubev A, Balashov Y, Mavrin S, Golubeva V, Aleinikov A, et al. The effect of rain characteristics on scavenging rate of tritium-oxide from the atmosphere. *Atmos Environ* 2012;62:573-83.  
[74] Atanasov D, Galeriu D. Rain scavenging of tritiated water vapour: a numerical Eulerian stationary model. *J Environ Radioact* 2011;102:43-52.  
[75] Brown R, Ogam G, Spencer F. Field studies of HT behavior in the environment: 1. Dispersion and oxidation in the atmosphere. *Fusion Technol* 1988;14:1165-9.  
[76] Nie B, Ni M, Jiang J, Wu Y. Dynamic evaluation of environmental impact due to tritium accidental release from the fusion reactor. *J Environ Radioact* 2015;148:137-40.  
[77] Ichimasa M, Ichimasa Y, Azuma Y, Komuro M, Fujita K, Akita Y. Oxidation of molecular tritium by surface soil. *J Radiat Res* 1988;29:144-51.  
[78] Raskob W. UFOTRI: program for assessing the off-site consequences from accidental tritium releases. Kernforsch Karls (KfK) 1990;4605.  
[79] Yokoyama S, Noguchi H, Kurosawa N. Development of dose assessment code for accidental tritium release. *Jpn J Health Phys* 2005;40:376-84.  
[80] Boyer C, Vichot L, Fromm M, Loset Y, Tatin-Froux F, Guetat P, et al. Tritium in plants: a review of current knowledge. *Environ Exp Bot* 2009;67:34-51.  
[81] Kim H, Kong T, Lee G, Jeong W, Kim S. Analysis of metabolism and effective half-life for radiation worker's tritium intake at pressurized heavy water reactors. *Progress Nucl Sci Technol* 2011;1:545-8.  
[82] Moghissi A, Carter M, Bretthauer E. Further studies on the long-term evaluation of the biological half-life of tritium. *Health Phys* 1972;23:805-6.  
[83] Taylor D. A biokinetic model for predicting the retention of \(^3\mathrm{H}\) in the human body after intakes of tritiated water. *Radiat Protect Dosim* 2003;105:225-8.  
[84] Hodgson A, Scott J, Fell T, Harrison J. Does from the consumption of Cardiff Bay flounder containing organically bound tritium. *J Rad Protect* 2005;25:149-59.  
[85] Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission (CNSC). Implementation of recommendations from the tritium studies synthesis report. 2019.  
[86] Rodgers D. Tritium dynamics in mice exposed to tritiated water and diet. *Health Phys* 1992;63:331-7.  
[87] IRSN. Tritium and the environment. 2010.  
[88] Fievet B, Pommier J, Voiseux C, Bois P, Laguionie P, Cossonnet C, et al. Transfer of tritium released into the marine environment by French nuclear facilities bordering the English Channel. *Environ Sci Technol* 2013;47:6696-703.  
[89] Galeriu D, Heling R, Melintescu A. The dynamics of tritium - including OBT - in the aquatic food chain. *Fusion Sci Technol* 2005;48:779-82.  
[90] Kim S, Farrow F, Bredlaw M, Stuart M. Changes in HTO and OBT activity concentrations in the Perch Lake aquatic ecosystem. *J Environ Radioact* 2016;165:280-5.  
[91] Kim S, Bredlaw M, Rousselle H, Stuart M. Distribution of organically bound tritium (OBT) activity concentrations in aquatic biota from eastern Canada. *J Environ Radioact* 2019;208-9:109597.  
[92] Galeriu D, Davis P, Raskob W, Melintescu A. Recent progresses in tritium radioecology and dosimetry. *Fusion Sci Technol* 2008;54:237-42.  
[93] Raskob W. Description of NORMTRL: a computer program for assessing the off-site consequences from air-borne releases of tritium during normal operation of nuclear facilities. Kernforsch Karls (KfK) 1994;5364.  
[94] Russell S, Ogram G. ETMOD: a new environmental tritium model. *Fusion Technol* 1992;21:645-50.  
[95] Monfort M, Patryl L, Armand P. Presentation of the CERES platform used to evaluate the consequences of the emissions of pollutants in the environment. *Radioprotection* 2011;46:S653-9.  
[96] Jeffers R, Parker G. Development, description and validation of a tritium environmental release model (TERM). *J Environ Radioact* 2014;127:95-104.  
[97] Yamazawa H. A one-dimensional dynamical soil-atmosphere tritiated water transport model. *Environ Model Software* 2001;16:739-51.  
[98] Peterson S. Historical doses from tritiated water and tritiated hydrogen gas released to the atmosphere from Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL). Part 1. Description of tritium dose model (DCART) for chronic releases from LLNL. 2004. UCRL-TR-205083.  
[99] Homann S, Aluzzi F. HotSpot health physics codes version 3.0 user's guide. 2014. LLNL-SM-636474.  
[100] Nie B, Ni M, Jiang J, Wu Y. A dynamic modeling \(^3\mathrm{H}\) transfer to the environment under accidental release from the fusion reactor. *J Fusion Energy* 2015;34:739-45.  
[101] Leelossy A, Lagzi I, Kovace A, Meszaros R. A review of numerical models to predict the atmospheric dispersion of radionuclides. *J Environ Radioact* 2018;182:20-33.  
[102] Sedighi A, Bazargan M. A CFD analysis of the pollutant dispersion from cooling towers with various configurations in the lower region of atmospheric boundary layer. *Sci Total Environ* 2019;696:133939.  
[103] Melintescu A, Galeriu D. Uncertainty of current understanding regarding OBT information in plants. *J Environ Radioact* 2017;167:134-49.  
[104] Kobayashi T, Otsuka S, Togawa O, Hayashi K. Development of a nonconservative radionuclides dispersion model in the ocean and its application to surface cesium-137 dispersion in the Irish Sea. *J Nucl Sci Technol* 2007;44:238-47.  
[105] Min B, Perianez R, Kim I, Suh K. Marine dispersion assessment of \(^{137}\mathrm{Cs}\) released from the Fukushima nuclear accident. *Mar Pollut Bull* 2013;72:22-33.  
[106] Filho F, Soares A, Aguiar A, Lapa C, Guimaraes A. Advanced nuclear reactors and tritium impacts. Modeling the aquatic pathway. *Prog Nucl Energy* 2013;69:9-22.  
[107] Bezhenar R, Heling R, Ievdin I, Iosjpe M, Maderich V, Willemsen S, et al. Integration of marine food chain model POSEIDON in JRODOS and testing versus Fukushima data. *Radioprotection* 2016;51:S137-9.  
[108] Robitaille D, Mysak L, Darby M. A box model study of the Greenland sea, Norwegian sea, and arctic ocean. *Clim Dynam* 1995;11:51-70.  
[109] Perianez R. Modelling the environmental behavior of pollutants in Algeciras Bay (south Spain). *Mar Pollut Bull* 2012;64:221-32.  
[110] IAEA. Environmental modelling for radiation safety (EMRAS)- A summary report of the results of the EMRAS programme (2003-2007). 2012. IAEA-TECDOC-1678.  
[111] Perianez R, Bezhenar R, Brovchenko I, Dufta C, Iosjpe M, Jung K, et al. Modelling of marine radionuclide dispersion in IAEA MODARIA program: lessons learnt from the Baltic Sea and Fukushima scenarios. *Sci Total Environ* 2016;569-570:594-602.  
[112] Marang L, Siclet F, Luck M, Maro D, Tenailleau L, Jean-Baptiste P, et al. Modelling tritium flux from water to atmosphere: application to the Loire River. *J Environ Radioact* 2011;102:244-51.  
[113] ICRP. 1990 recommendations of the international commission on radiological protection. 1991.  
[114] Nie B, Ni M, Wei S. Individual dose due to radioactivity accidental release from fusion reactor. *J Hazard Mater* 2017;327:135-43.  
[115] Choi G, Lim J, Lim K, Kim K, Lee J. Characteristics of regional scale atmospheric dispersion around Ki-Jang research reactor using the Lagrangian Gaussian puff dispersion model. *Nucl Eng Technol* 2018;50:68-79.  
[116] ITER. Preliminary safety report. RPS); 2011.  
[117] Taylor N, Merrill B, Cadwallader L, Pace L, El-Guebaly L, Humrickhouse P, et al. Materials-related issues in the safety and licensing of nuclear fusion facilities. *Nucl Fusion* 2017;57:092003.  
[118] Roth J, Tsitrone E, Loarte A, Loarer Th, Counsell G, Neu R, et al. Recent analysis of key plasma wall interactions issues for ITER. *J Nucl Mater* 2009;390-391:1-9.  
[119] IAEA. Criteria for use in preparedness and response for a nuclear or radiological emergency. 2011.  
[120] IAEA. Summary of the ITER final design report. 2001.  
[121] IAEA. Safety assessment and verification for nuclear power plants. 2001.  
[122] Wheatley S, Sovacool B, Sornette D. Of disasters and dragon kings: a statistical analysis of nuclear power incidents and accidents. *Risk Anal* 2016;37:99-115.  
[123] Steinhauser G, Brandl A, Johnson T. Comparison of the Chernobyl and Fukushima nuclear accidents: a review of the environmental impacts. *Sci Total Environ* 2014;470-471:800-17.  
[124] Nie B, Ni M, Liu J, Zhu Z, Zhu ZL, Li F. Insights into potential consequences of fusion hypothetical accident, lessons learnt from the former fission accidents. *Environ Pollut* 2019;245:921-31.  
[125] IAEA. Diagnosis and treatment of radiation injuries. 1998.  
[126] Preston D, Ron E, Tokuoka S, Funamoto S, Nishi N, Soda M, et al. Solid cancer incidence in atomic bomb survivors: 1958-1998. *Radiat Res* 2007;168:1-64.  
[127] Wakeford R, Tawn E. The meaning of low dose and low dose-rate. *J Radiol Prot* 2010;30:1-3.  
[128] Tubiana M, Aurengo A, Averbeck D, Masse R. The debate on the use of linear no threshold for assessing the effects of low doses. *J Radiol Prot* 2006;26:317-24.  
[129] Averbeck D, Salomaa S, Bouffler S, Ottolenghi A, Smyth V, Sabatier L. Progress in low dose health risk research: novel effects and new concepts in low dose radiobiology. *Mutat Res Rev Mutat Res* 2018;776:46-69.  
[130] Kim J, Bang Y, Lee W. Living near nuclear power plants and thyroid cancer risk: a systematic review and meta-analysis. *Environ Int* 2016;87:42-8.  
[131] Mueller W, Gil E, et al.  
[132] Luckey T D. Radiation hormesis: the good, the bad, and the ugly. *Dose-Response* 2006;4:169-90.  
[133] Calabrese E J. Hormesis: why it is important to toxicology and toxicologists. *Environ Toxicol Chem* 2008;27:1451-74.  
[134] ICRP. Low-dose extrapolation of radiation-related cancer risk. ICRP Publication 99. *Ann ICRP* 2005;35(4).  
[135] Harrison J D, Balonov M, Bochud F, et al. ICRP publication 147: Use of dose quantities in radiological protection. *Ann ICRP* 2021;50(1).  
[136] Tauchi H, Imamura T, Matsumoto H, et al. Collaborative study on the biological effects of tritium: overview of the project. *Fusion Sci Technol* 2011;60:1198-201.  
[137] Tauchi H, Matsumoto H, et al. A novel approach to identify stochastic effects of low level tritium radiation. *J Radiat Res* 2018;59:ii131-ii136.  
[138] CNSC. Tritium studies project synthesis report. INFO-0800. 2011.  
[139] Wakeford R. The risk of leukaemia in young children from exposure to tritium and carbon-14 in the discharges of German nuclear power stations and in the fallout from atmospheric nuclear weapons testing. *Radiat Environ Biophys* 2014;53:365-79.  
[140] Gueguen Y, Priest N, Dublineau I, Bannister L, Benderitter M, Durand C, et al. In vivo animal studies help achieve international consensus on standards and guidelines for health risk estimates for chronic exposure to low levels of tritium in drinking water. *Environ Mol Mutagen* 2018;59:586-94.  
[141] Gagnaire B, Adam-Guillemin C, Festarini A, Cavalie I, Della-Vedova C, Shultz C, et al. Effects of in situ exposure to tritiated natural environments: a multibiomarker approach using the fathead minnow, *Pimephales promelas*. *Sci Total Environ* 2017;599-600:597-611.  
[142] Stuart M, Festarini A, Schleicher K, Tan E, Kim S, Wen K, et al. Biological effects of tritium on fish cells in the concentration range of international drinking water standards. *Int J Radiat Biol* 2016;92:563-71.  
[143] Tawn E, Curwen G, Riddell A. Chromosome aberrations in workers occupationally exposed to tritium. *J Radiol Prot* 2018;38:N9-16.  
[144] Little M, Lambert B. Systematic review of experimental studies on the relative biological effectiveness of tritium. *Radiat Environ Biophys* 2008;47:71-93.  
[145] Mclaughlin J, King W, Anderson T, Clarke E, Ashmore J. Paternal radiation exposure and leukaemia in offspring: the Ontario case-control study. *Br Med J* 1993;307:956-66.

---