# The Impact of Tritium in the Environment

**Authors**: V. Dolin, Y. Yakovlev, S.A. Cancemi, R. Lo Franco

**Affiliations**:
- Department of Civil and Industrial Engineering, University of Pisa, Lg. L. Lazzarino, n. 1, 56126 Pisa, Italy
- State Institution "Institute of Environmental Geochemistry of National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine", 34a, Palladin Av., 03680 Kyiv, Ukraine

**Published in**: Applied Sciences, Volume 15, Issue 12, 6664 (2025)

**DOI**: https://doi.org/10.3390/app15126664

**Received**: 30 April 2025  
**Revised**: 27 May 2025  
**Accepted**: 9 June 2025  
**Published**: 13 June 2025

**Keywords**: nuclear energy; tritium; safety; RWs; environment

---

## Abstract

Tritium is a radioisotope that is extremely mobile in the biosphere and that can be transferred to the environment and to humans mainly via tritium oxide or tritiated water. Moreover, as is widely known, it is extremely difficult to detect in the environment. In the last decade, many studies and research activities have been performed to fill the knowledge gap on this radionuclide, the amount of which is expected to be increasingly released into the environment from nuclear installations in the near future. Considering this and the fact that the biological and environmental effects produced by tritium have been examined mainly from a medical and detection monitoring point of view, it is considered important to propose in this study a review of the critical aspects of tritium from the environmental, engineering, and waste management points of view. Identifying sources and effects of tritium, tritium materials and wastes containing tritium in the environment is also fundamental for planning the specific and necessary actions required for an effective waste management approach under, e.g., disposal conditions. The critical analysis of the published recent studies has allowed to evaluate, for example, that the expected rate of tritium generation in a fusion reactor is four orders of magnitude higher than that of LWRs, and the environmental release from a fusion reactor is 1.4-2.2‰, which is twice as much as from a heavy water reactor and more than two orders of magnitude higher than from a LWRs. Furthermore, with reference to the waste management strategy, it is emphasized, e.g., that the condensation of moisture inside vaults and the interaction of H₂O with the disposal body determine the formation of tritiated water, which is filtered through the concrete and eventually released into the environment. Consequently, in the selection of engineered barrier materials for repositories/disposal facilities, the use of a mixture of a framework and layered silicates is proposed to improve its absorption and filtering properties.

---

## 1. Introduction

The use of nuclear energy is expected to play an important role in the near future in the transition towards clean energy (zero emissions goal).

Tritium, as is widely and globally known, is a radioactive isotope of hydrogen that can be transferred to the environment and to humans mainly via tritium oxide or tritiated water (HTO). It is also generated by the operation and decommissioning of nuclear power plants (including dismantling and spent fuel reprocessing), nuclear incidents, such as Fukushima, Japan, in 2011, radioisotope production and in medical and research applications [1-3].

In the future, tritium release is expected to increase through the operation of new nuclear power plants, whether they are fission or fusion reactors [4], because of its production by the neutron activation of ²H, ³He, ⁶Li, and ¹⁰B [5].

Tritium is a radioisotope that is extremely mobile in biological systems; it reacts with oxygen, and it rapidly integrates into the biosphere as HTO [1], which has chemical characteristics almost identical to water, from which it is technically extremely difficult to remove. As for its environmental effects, the largest impacts are likely, therefore, to occur only while relatively high activity concentrations of HTO persist.

Compared to other radionuclides, by taking advantage of these characteristics, tritium can be released into the environment, specifically diluted into water in huge quantities and at low concentrations per year, according to the laws and regulations of the respective countries where nuclear power plants are operated (for example, the Fukushima Daiichi plant will gradually release up to 22 trillion Bq or less of tritium per year over the next 20 to 30 years, a low level compared to the amounts released by nuclear power plants around the world, including those in Europe, North America and other parts of Asia outside of Japan).

Indeed, tritium is the only radioactive isotope in the triad of hydrogen isotopes that exists for a relatively long time. A soft beta emitter with an average energy of 5.7 keV and a half-life of 12.33 years, it is the most common natural light radioactive isotope. About 200 g of tritium is formed annually in the upper atmosphere under the influence of cosmic radiation, which maintains a natural tritium content in the biosphere at 1.3 × 10¹⁸ Bq. Along with its stable analogue, it can migrate quite easily into moisture in the air and water flows and can accumulate as a component of mineral and organic compounds. It is a potential hazard, since it, along with a stable hydrogen isotope, is a component of water and acts as a building block of cellular tissue in living organisms.

From what has been said, it appears clear that identifying the nature and extent of the problems of tritium or of the materials and/or wastes containing it is a fundamental aspect not only in terms of adequately evaluating the biological impact of tritium and other radionuclides of environmental relevance but also for planning the specific and the necessary actions required for an effective waste management approach under, e.g., disposal conditions. Moreover, the problem of tritium and tritium waste has become particularly critical since the late 70s, primarily due to the development of civil and military nuclear technologies.

With most of the studies available in the literature referring to the understanding of tritium transport, transfer and dispersion modelling, e.g., during the hydrological cycle, or to the assessment of health impacts resulting from historical operations [6-8], the present review aims to critically analyze the available literature regarding the biological effects, sources, waste management challenges and environmental consequence of tritium. Existing knowledge gaps are also identified.

---

## 2. Artificial Sources

### 2.1. Nuclear Tests

The most powerful source of man-made tritium was nuclear testing. Tritium is formed in significant amounts in nuclear and especially thermonuclear explosions (both above-ground and underground) because of fission and fusion reactions. Explosions based on nuclear fission produced 2.6 × 10¹⁵ Bq per megaton of tritium, while fusion ones produced up to 7.6 × 10¹⁷ Bq per megaton ³H [9,10]. Therefore, about 2.4 × 10²⁰ Bq (665 kg) of tritium was released into the atmosphere between 1945 and 1975. Most of it has since decayed, but the global tritium amount is today an order of magnitude higher than its natural content (Figure 1), and it is mainly concentrated in the ocean (Figure 2).

**Figure 1. Evolution of tritium inventory in the biosphere.** Sources: 1—nuclear tests, 2—nuclear energy, 3—natural sources, 4—integrated value.

**Figure 2. Modern distribution of "global" tritium in the biosphere.**

By 1990, the widespread use of phosphors based on tritium compounds led to the injection of about 7.4 × 10¹⁸ Bq into the biosphere [16]. However, scientific advances in the production of alternative sources of luminescence over the next two decades will lead to a gradual attenuation of this source of tritium. Instead, soon, we should expect a rapid development of the production of autonomous tritium-based power supplies.

### 2.2. Nuclear Power Engineering

With the cessation (restriction) of nuclear testing, the nuclear industry and nuclear power engineering, in particular, nuclear reactors and reprocessing plants, have become the most important sources of tritium in the environment.

In nuclear reactors, tritium is formed inside fission reactions of ²³⁵U and ²³⁹Pu nuclei, as well as in the interaction of neutrons with Li, B, and D. More than 96% of tritium in light-water reactors and gas-cooled reactors is produced by the ternary fission of uranium and plutonium [17,18]. When irradiating plutonium nuclei in the fuel elements, the tritium yield is three times more efficient than when irradiating uranium [19].

In water reactors, tritium is also produced by the activation of deuterium present in the coolant/moderator water. In light-water reactors, due to the small amount of deuterium in natural water (D₂O:H₂O = 1.5 × 10⁻⁴) and the low probability of neutron capture, this source of tritium is insignificant. In heavy-water reactors where D₂O is used as a moderator/coolant, deuterium activation is the main source of tritium (Table 1). Tritium emissions to the environment during a reactor campaign vary from 0.36 (BWR) to 8.8% (HWR), depending on the process.

In a two-loop PWR, the intensity of the chain reaction (reactivity) is controlled by changing the concentration of boron in the water of the first circuit. The dissolution of boric acid in the primary cooling circuit of a PWR allows for the regulation of the amount of ¹⁰B in the reaction medium and the removal of heat from the reactor core. Unlike PWRs, BWR cooling circuits do not use borates. In BWRs, boron is used in control rods fabricated from boron carbide, fuel pools, and the control system fluid reserve tank.

The normalized tritium generation amount due to ternary fission in PWRs and BWRs is of the same value. In addition, about 30% of the tritium in BWRs is generated by neutron capture reactions with ¹⁰B nuclei in the control rods, which is an order of magnitude more than in the primary cooling circuit of PWRs. Most of the tritium released from PWRs appears in the liquid effluent (about 85%), whereas 75% of the tritium released from BWRs is in the form of airborne effluents [20].

The expected tritium generation in a fusion reactor is four orders of magnitude higher than in PWRs and BWRs, and the environmental release from a fusion reactor is estimated at 1.4-2.2‰, which, in absolute values, is two times higher than the release from a heavy-water reactor (Table 1).

**Table 1. Assessment of tritium generation and environmental emission in nuclear reactors, Bq·MWe·y⁻¹ [21-23].**

| Tritium Source | PWR | BWR | HWR | GCR | ITER* |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Fission | 7.5 × 10¹¹ | 7.5 × 10¹¹ | 5.5 × 10¹¹ | 7.5 × 10¹¹ | — |
| Activation of: | | | | | |
| - Deuterium | 4.0 × 10⁷ | 4.0 × 10⁷ | 2.0 × 10¹³ | — | — |
| - Lithium | 7.0 × 10⁸ | — | 2.0 × 10¹⁰ | — | — |
| - Boron | 2.6 × 10¹⁰ | 3.0 × 10¹¹ | — | — | — |
| Total | 8.0 × 10¹¹ | 1.1 × 10¹² | 2.0 × 10¹³ | 8.0 × 10¹¹ | 2.0 × 10¹⁶ |
| Emission | 2.3 × 10¹⁰ | 3.8 × 10⁹ | 1.8 × 10¹² | 7.3 × 10⁹ | 4.0 × 10¹² |

* expected generation and loss by fusion.

The content of tritium generated by the global nuclear power complex in the biosphere was calculated using the WNA and IAEA reactor databases [13] and taking into account the type of reactor, the amount of electricity produced, and radioactive decay (Figure 3).

**Figure 3. Integrated Tritium Generation by nuclear power engineering.**

The Integrated Tritium Generation (ITG) values reflect the total amount of tritium generated from the commissioning of the first nuclear power reactor (1954) to the year corresponding to each point. The modelling results indicate that the ITG values are described with high confidence (R² = 0.99) by the curve:

$$L_g(ITG) = A + B(1 - e^{-kt}) \quad (1)$$

where $A$ and $B$ are the coefficients that determine the initial $(A)$ and final (equilibrium) $(A + B)$ conditions of the process, $k$ is the rate constant, and $t$ is the time.

Analysis of the parameters of Equation (1) determined by the iteration method $(A = 12.16; B = 6.93; k = 0.0621\ y^{-1})$ shows that given current technologies and global development trends, the tritium content in the biosphere generated by nuclear power plants will not exceed $1.23 \times 10^{19}$ Bq, i.e., 10 times the natural level. Throughout the entire operation of the global nuclear power complex, almost 90% of the electricity has been generated by light-water PWRs and BWRs [24].

Meanwhile, the introduction of fusion technology can significantly disrupt the current natural and technogenic balance of tritium in the biosphere.

**Figure 4. Modern annual tritium emissions from nuclear power engineering.**

A total of 97-99% of ³H is contained in spent fuel assemblies subjected to continuous water cooling inside the reactor or independent ponds for 5-30 years. During this period, the diffusion of tritium from the fuel rods into the coolant water environment can reach up to 45%, and the permanent tritium concentration in the pool may exceed 3 GBq·dm⁻³ [25].

**Figure 5. Release of tritium into the environment during the nuclear power cycle.**

**Figure 6. Integrated Energy Generation (IEG) by different types of nuclear reactors.**

**Figure 7. The global share of Nuclear Electricity Generation (NEG).** The trend interpolation function (NEG, % = 18.3e^{-0.029t}, R² = 0.91) was calculated according to the IAEA database [13].

### 2.3. Fusion

The only technology known today that would allow for such a "technological breakthrough" is fusion. The International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER) project has shown that such a machine can be built at the current level of technological development and will be able to conduct the physical and nuclear technological tests necessary to create the first experimental fusion power plant.

First-generation fusion reactors (TOKAMAK, STELLARATOR) will likely be powered by a mixture of deuterium and tritium. This is the most technically simple fusion reaction and is accompanied by the formation of a helium nucleus (alpha particle):

$$^2_1H + ^3_1H \rightarrow ^4_2He + ^1_0n + 17.6\ \text{MeV} \quad (3)$$

For a 2 GWe fusion reactor, a tritium mass flow rate of 0.32 kg/day must be ensured. At the same time, its burnup rate is estimated at 0.3%, which means that the total tritium inventory in the reactor should reach several dozens of kilograms. Due to technological improvements, the total initial amount of tritium will be 3.0-3.3 kg and will double every 6.8-12.8 years [30]. Therefore, after 20 years of operation, the tritium inventory inside the reactor will be about 25 kg.

Assuming that current nuclear power capacity is replaced by fusion reactors within the next 20 years, the amount of tritium in the biosphere could reach 500 kg, which corresponds to the amount released into the atmosphere during the period of active nuclear testing and exceeds the natural background by more than two orders of magnitude.

---

## 3. Waste Management

Unconditioned solid tritium wastes in the mixture of radioactive waste are usually stored in near-surface facilities designed to contain radioactive sources, radioactive material, spent fuel, or radioactive waste with the intention of retrieval [33], and they are arranged with a concrete biological barrier. Experimental studies [25] have shown that the condensation of moisture inside vaults (containers, packages, etc.) and the interaction of H₂O with the body of storage due to isotopic exchange results in tritiated water formation that is filtered through the concrete, which is essentially a porous material, and eventually released into the environment (Figure 8). Additional water may enter the vaults by filtering through the concrete from the environment because of natural weakening or mechanical damage to the insulation barriers during long-term operation of the storage facility.

**Figure 8. Condensed tritiated water in the near-surface "RADON" RAW facility in Kyiv, Ukraine: (a) pumping and (b) opened concrete vault.**

**Figure 9. The change in groundwater aquifer tritium contamination after pumping HTO from vaults during spring (a) and summer (b) in 2012.**

### Clay-Tritium Interactions

Experimental studies have shown that phyllosilicates (montmorillonite, sepiolite, palygorskite) can be such materials. The potential properties of layered silicates for the accumulation and retention of tritium are determined by the structural and chemical features of minerals [45].

The potential adsorption capacity of layered silicates (kaolinite, montmorillonite, palygorskite) for tritium is $(1.06-1.81) \times 10^{22}$ hydrogen atoms per gram of mineral [46,47].

Experimentally, the most effective silicates were mixtures of bentonite and zeolite, with a potential tritium capacity of $10^{13}$ Bq·g⁻¹. It was found that $63 \pm 11\%$ of the total tritium inventory in the mineral was accumulated in the surface-adsorbed state. In the interlayer space or channel structures, this amount was, on average, $24 \pm 10\%$, and in structural OH groups, it was up to $13 \pm 9\%$.

**Figure 10. Tritium decay during storage.**

---

## 4. Biological Effects

Being analogous to protium, except for in certain reactions where the difference in behavior is due to the mass of ³H, tritium is included in the hydrogen cycle in the biosphere, in the behavior of HTO and its vapor form, and in various organic and hydrogen compounds. The ecological interest in tritium is due to three main factors:

(1) The rather high content of tritium in the biosphere due to the combined influence of natural and anthropogenic factors.
(2) The extremely high rate of ³H's incorporation into biochemical processes.
(3) The potential radiation hazard to living organisms, primarily from the standpoint of genetic effects [1].

**Table 2. Penetration range, m, of a beta particle into materials depending on its energy [54,55].**

| Material | E(β) 5.7 keV (Average) | E(β) 18.6 keV (Maximum) |
| --- | --- | --- |
| T₂ gas, 0°C, 101,325 Pa | 2.4 × 10⁻³ | 3.2 × 10⁻² |
| Air, 0°C, 101,325 Pa | 3.6 × 10⁻⁴ | 4.5 × 10⁻³ |
| Water, soft tissues, oils | 4.2 × 10⁻⁷ | 5.2 × 10⁻⁶ |

An analysis of the literature sources shows that the radiobiological properties of tritium have not been studied sufficiently. Uncertainty of different scientifically and experimentally grounded assessments considerably exceeds a factor of 100,000. Estimates of safe concentrations of tritium in drinking water, according to official WHO [56], EURATOM [57], ICRP [58], IAEA, and EPA [59] documents and scientific publications [46], differ by a factor of almost 600,000 [60-64].

The calculation of the safe concentration $(C_1)$ of tritium for health is as follows:

$$C_1 = \frac{\text{CRL}}{\text{EP} \times \text{CRC} \times \text{WIR}} \quad (7)$$

where CRL is the de minimis cancer risk level ($10^{-6}$), EP is the exposure period (70 years), CRC is the cancer risk coefficient ($9.44 \times 10^{-13}\ \text{Bq}^{-1}$ for mortality), and WIR is the water ingestion rate ($730\ \text{dm}^3$ annually for adults). Calculations show that the "safe" concentration of tritium in drinking water should be between 14 and 21 Bq·dm⁻³.

**Table 3. Dose factors recommended by the ICRP [58].**

| Exposure Route | Tritium Species | Dose Factor [Sv·Bq⁻¹] |
| --- | --- | --- |
| | | Adults | Children (≤1 y) |
| Inhalation | Tritiated water HTO (from air) | 1.8 × 10⁻¹¹ | 1.1 × 10⁻¹⁰ |
| | Tritiated gas (hydrogen) HT | 1.8 × 10⁻¹⁵ | 4.8 × 10⁻¹⁵ |
| | Tritiated methane CH₃T | 1.8 × 10⁻¹³ | 4.8 × 10⁻¹³ |
| | Organically bonded tritium (OBT) | 4.1 × 10⁻¹¹ | 4.8 × 10⁻¹¹ |
| Oral ingestion | Tritiated water HTO (aqueous specie) | 1.8 × 10⁻¹¹ | 4.8 × 10⁻¹¹ |
| | Organically bonded tritium (OBT) | 4.2 × 10⁻¹¹ | 1.2 × 10⁻¹⁰ |

**Table 4. Tritium water regulatory limits (TRLs) around the world.**

| Country | Source | TRL [Bq·dm⁻³] | CRC [10⁻⁶ Morbidity/Mortality] | Equivalent Dose/IDC [μSv·y⁻¹] |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Recommended for EU countries | [57] | 100 | 5/7 | 1.31/100 |
| Switzerland | [73] | 100 | 5/7 | 1.31/100 |
| Norway | [74] | 100 | 5/7 | 1.31/100 |
| USA | [75] | 740 | 36/52 | 9.72/40 |
| Canada | [76,77] | 7000 | 338/490 | 92/50 |
| Russia | [78] | 7600 | 367/523 | 100/1000 |
| Recommended by the WHO | [79] | 10,000 | 482/700 | 131/100 |
| Finland | [79,80] | 30,000 | 1447/2100 | 394/100 |
| Ukraine | [81] | 30,000 | 1447/2100 | 394/1000 |
| Japan | [82,83] | 60,000* | 2894/4200 | 788.4/1000 |
| Australia | [72] | 76,103 | 3671/5228 | 1000/1000 |

* The regulatory limit for liquid radioactive waste. In Japan, there are no standards for tritium in drinking water or food [83].

**Table 5. Integrated values of relative biological effectiveness (RBE) and dose coefficients for tritium water (HTO) and organically bound tritium (OBT).**

| Category of Object | Tritium Species | Confidence Interval | | | RBE |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| | | 5% | Average/Recommended | 95% | |
| Adult body [95] | HTO | 1.2 | 2.3 | 3.8 | |
| | OBT | 2.3 | 5.0 | 11.6 | |
| Fetus (if orally ingested during pregnancy) [95] | HTO | 2.1 | 4.4 | 8.1 | |
| | OBT | 4.0 | 9.8 | 23.1 | |
| Blood lymphocytes [96] | OBT | 1.13 | 2.5 | 3.1 | |
| Recommended by the ICRP [97] | HTO | 1 | 1 | 2.5 | |
| | OBT | 1 | 1 | 2.5 | |
| **Ingestion Dose Coefficients for Adults, Sv·Bq⁻¹·10¹¹** | | | | | |
| Adult whole body [98] | HTO | 2.1 | 3.9 | 6.6 | |
| | OBT | 3.9 | 8.7 | 20 | |
| Recommended by the ICRP [99] | HTO | | 1.8 | | |
| | OBT | | 4.1 | | |

---

## 5. Isotopic Effects of Hydrogen in Living and Inanimate Matter

Isotopic effects, i.e., differences in the properties of isotopes of a chemical element or its compounds containing different isotopes, are most often caused by differences in the mass of the isotope's nuclei (isotopic effects of the first kind), but they can also be caused by differences in nuclear magnetic properties (isotopic effects of the second kind). The isotopic effects of the first kind are stronger the greater the difference in isotope masses, i.e., with increasing atomic mass, the isotopic effect decreases, and the largest is observed for isotopic hydrogen compounds.

The increase in the binding energy in isotopic hydrogen compounds from protium to tritium largely explains several isotopic effects. In an isotopic water molecule (HTO), the T-O covalent bond is stronger than the H-O bond, so it is expected that protium is more attracted to the proton form (hydroxonium H₃O⁺), and tritium is mainly attracted to the hydroxyl (TO⁻) groups. This substantiates the possibility of isotopic separation of hydrogen by electrodialysis methods, as well as by isotopic substitution in structural OH-groups of clay minerals.

### The Phenomenon of Isotope Osmosis

**Figure 11. Visualization of isotopic osmosis effect:** 1—protium water, 2—bentonite membrane, 3—tritiated water, 4—level of the isotope osmosis pressure.

**Figure 12. Fractionation of tritium during the growth of white willow.**

**Figure 13. Separation of hydrogen isotopes from water solution in 3-chamber dialyzer divided with bentonite membranes:** (a) tritium-protium, (b) tritium-deuterium.

---

## 6. Summary

Once released into the environment, tritium is distributed globally owing to its half-life and residence time; therefore, the consequences of its exposure should be considered to ensure the protection of the public and the environment from radioactive discharges.

Despite improvements in the operational practices of nuclear plants and in waste management and disposal, several problems remain. The main problems are as follows:

- An increased content of tritium in the biosphere at about 20 times that at the beginning of the nuclear era.
- Insufficient study of the radiobiological impact of tritium: the impact of incorporated tritium on living organisms is estimated to be three times higher than that of ¹³⁷Cs, while the local impact (for DNA molecule) may be 300 times higher.
- Uncertainty of safe concentrations: world standards for the tritium content in drinking water differ by more than 700 times (from 100 to 76,100 Bq·dm⁻³), and scientifically based estimates differ by 600,000 times.
- Extremely high migration capacity of the aqueous form of tritium: the rate constant of the isotopic exchange of protium for tritium in water is estimated at $(1.5 \pm 0.5) \times 10^{-4}\ \text{s}^{-1}$.
- The crucial role of water for living organisms: there is no indication of the biomagnification of tritium in terrestrial systems.
- The large amount of contradictory data on tritium accumulation in living organisms.
- The fact that there are practically no ways to clean liquid discharges and gaseous emissions of tritium from nuclear facilities; existing methods of hydrogen isotope separation require significant energy costs.
- The metastability of tritium emissions from nuclear reactors, which cause a paroxysmal nature of tritium emissions and create obstacles in predicting its distribution in the environment.

---

## References

1. Ferreira, M.F.; Turner, A.; Vernon, E.L.; Grisolia, C.; Lebaron-Jacobs, L.; Malard, V.; Jha, A.N. Tritium: Its relevance, sources and impacts on non-human biota. Sci. Total Environ. 2023, 876, 162816.

2. Oms, P.E.; Du Bois, P.B.; Dumas, F.; Lazure, P.; Morillon, M.; Voiseux, C.; Le Corre, C.; Cossonnet, C.; Solier, L.; Morin, P. Inventory and distribution of Tritium in the oceans in 2016. Sci. Total Environ. 2019, 656, 1289-1303.

3. Nie, B.; Fang, S.; Jiang, M.; Wang, L.; Ni, M.; Zheng, J.; Yang, Z.; Li, F. Anthropogenic Tritium: inventory, discharge, environmental behavior and health effects. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2021, 135, 110188.

4. Larsen, G.; Babineau, D. An Evaluation of the Global Effects of Tritium Emissions from Nuclear Fusion Power. Fusion Eng. Des. 2020, 158, 111690.

5. International Atomic Energy Agency. Management of Waste Containing Tritium and Carbon-14; Technical Reports Series No. 421; IAEA: Vienna, Austria, 2004.

... (full reference list available in original paper)