# Estimation of 14CO2 flux at soil-atmosphere interface and distribution of 14C in forest ecosystem

**Authors:** Jun Koarashi, Hikaru Amano, Mariko Andoh, Takao Iida, Jun Moriiizumi
**Journal:** Journal of Environmental Radioactivity
**Year:** 2002
**Volume:** 60
**Pages:** 249-261

## Abstract
To realize the dynamical behavior of $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ among exchangeable carbon reservoirs in terrestrial environment, a method for in situ determination of $^{14}\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ flux at soil-atmosphere interface and a high flow rate $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ sampler were developed. This method allowed us to collect integrated quantity of $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ for determining $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ activity over an extended time period under environmental conditions with minimal site disturbance. The $^{14}\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ flux from ground surface was estimated to be $1.59\times 10^{-5} \mathrm{Bq} \mathrm{m}^{-2} \mathrm{s}^{-1}$ in a forest floor with the method. The specific activities of $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ in environmental materials such as some biological and air samples were also determined in the vicinity of the place, where the flux measurement was made, to discuss the behavior of $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ in the forest ecosystem. The results indicated that fresh pine needles had a similar $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ specific activity to the atmospheric $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ at the same height due to its fairly rapid equilibrium, $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ specific activity in the atmospheric $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ has a concentration gradient near the ground surface and, at least in this site, $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ with high $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ specific activity was generated by decomposition of soil organic matter which may be accumulated in soil as a result of former nuclear weapons tests.

## 1. Introduction
Carbon-14 has a long radioactive half-life of 5730 years, and is naturally produced by the cosmic-ray interactions $^{14}\mathrm{N(n,p)^{14}C}$ in the atmosphere (Libby, 1946). Once produced, $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ is oxidized to chemical form of $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ and distributes globally. Although the specific activity of $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ was elevated in the 1950-60s by a series of atmospheric nuclear weapons tests and reached almost double the value for the atmospheric $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$, the level has decreased gradually after the nuclear test ban treaty (Cain & Suess, 1976; Nydal & Lövseth, 1983). Accompanying recent peaceful uses of nuclear energy, however, $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ is artificially produced by new sources such as nuclear power plants and reprocessing facilities, and some $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ atoms are certainly released into the environment (Kunz, 1985; Levin, Kromer, Barabas, & Männich, 1988; Uchrin, Csaba, Hertelendi, Ormai, & Barnabas, 1992). It is possible that the $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ derived from these new sources contributes to a part of the radiation dose for both local and global populations (Killough & Rowher, 1978; McCartney, Baxter, & Scott, 1988a, b; UNSCEAR, 1993; McNamara & McCartney, 1998).

In the case that continuous or acute localized release from these new sources occurs, the dynamical behavior of $^{14}\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ in the terrestrial environment must be considered at initial stage. The $^{14}\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ released into the environment enters the carbon cycle of exchangeable carbon reservoirs such as atmosphere and biosphere in terrestrial environment. Since $^{14}\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ will migrate in response to its own concentration gradient regardless of the distribution of stable $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ in the gas mixture, it is expected to behave differently from stable $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ especially in the vicinity of the sources. Owing to its long half-life and the important role of carbon in food chains in addition to the increase of the amount of $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ released into the environment along with the growth of nuclear industry in the near future, it is very important to elucidate the migration of $^{14}\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ between atmosphere and biosphere not only around nuclear facilities but also in the general environment.

This paper describes a method for in situ quantitative estimation of $^{14}\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ flux at soil-atmosphere interface. The method is based on a flow-through chamber system which can maintain environmental condition with minimal disturbance, and allows to collect an integrated quantity of $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ for determining $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ activity over an extended time period. Using the method, the $^{14}\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ flux was estimated in a forest floor in Tokai Research Establishment, Japan Atomic Energy Research Institute (JAERI). The specific activities of $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ in the environmental materials were also determined to discuss the behavior of $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ in the forest ecosystem.

## 2. Estimation of $\mathbf{CO}_{2}$ and $^{14}\mathbf{CO}_{2}$ fluxes at soil-atmosphere interface

### 2.1. Model for estimation of $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ and $^{14}\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ fluxes at soil-atmosphere interface.
The flow-through chamber system for estimating trace gas flux at soil-atmosphere interface can be modeled as in Fig. 1. In the model, the variation of gas concentration in the chamber with time is described by the following equation:

$$
\frac{\mathrm{d}C}{\mathrm{d}t} = \frac{F}{H} - \frac{C}{\tau} + \frac{C_a}{\tau}, \quad (1)
$$

where $C$ is the trace gas concentration inside the chamber ($\mathrm{g~m^{-3}}$ for $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ or $\mathrm{Bq~m^{-3}}$ for $^{14}\mathrm{CO}_{2}$), $C_{a}$ the gas concentration in ambient air ($\mathrm{g~m^{-3}}$ or $\mathrm{Bq~m^{-3}}$), $F$ the trace gas flux from ground surface ($\mathrm{g~m^{-2}~s^{-1}}$ or $\mathrm{Bq~m^{-2}~s^{-1}}$), $H$ the chamber height (m), and $\tau$ the time required for exchange of air in the chamber by the suction of a sampler (s). The time $\tau$ can be expressed as $\tau = V/u$, where $V$ is the volume of the chamber ($\mathrm{m^{3}}$) and $u$ the airflow rate ($\mathrm{m^{3}~s^{-1}}$).

The above equation states that the variation of trace gas concentration inside the chamber is due to the trace gas emitted from soil, the trace gas transported by the ambient air and that flowing towards the sampler. It is assumed that (1) the air inside the chamber is rapidly mixed, (2) the trace gas flux from soil is constant over the sampling period, (3) the concentration of the trace gas in the ambient air can be considered as constant over the experimental period and (4) the airflow rate of the ambient air flowing into the chamber at the inlet is equal to that of the enclosed air flowing to the sampler at the outlet.

By solving Eq. (1) under the assumption that in field experiments the trace gas concentration inside the chamber before its closing is equal to that in the ambient air, the trace gas concentration inside the chamber as a function of time is given by

$$
C(t) = C_{a} + \frac{FS}{u}\Big\{1 - \exp\Big(-\frac{t}{\tau}\Big)\Big\}, \quad (2)
$$

where $S$ is the surface area of soil covered by the chamber ($\mathrm{m^{2}}$).

From Eq. (2), it is possible to calculate the amount of trace gas $Q_{out}(T)$ (g) or (Bq) collected by the sampler in the total sampling period $T$ (s).

$$
Q_{out}(T) = \int_{0}^{T} uC(t) \mathrm{d}t = (uC_{a} + FS)T - FS\tau \left\{1 - \exp\left(-\frac{T}{\tau}\right)\right\}. \quad (3)
$$

The trace gas flux averaged over the sampling period can be estimated by the following equation:

$$
F = \frac{Q_{out}(T) - uC_{a}T}{ST - S\tau \{1 - \exp(-T / \tau)\}}. \quad (4)
$$

The factor $uC_{a}T$ in Eq. (4) is equivalent to the amount of trace gas $Q_{in}(T)$ (g) or (Bq) flowing into the chamber with the ambient air in the total sampling period. Eq. (4) enables us to estimate the flux of trace gas through the experimental measurement of the trace gas with the flow-through chamber system. The trace gas flux can be determined from the chamber size, experimental conditions such as airflow rate and sampling period, and experimental results such as the amounts of trace gas collected by the sampler and flowing into the chamber.

As in a conventional flow-through chamber system it must be ensured that sufficient time is allowed for the trace gas accumulation to adjust to the newly established concentration of the gas inside the chamber, the trace gas flux may be significantly underestimated or a longer sampling period is required for ignoring the effect of accumulation of the trace gas inside the chamber at the initial stage. By using Eq. (4), however, the trace gas flux can be estimated exactly with shorter sampling period even when the concentration of the gas inside the chamber is not established. The steady-state concentration $C_{e}$ ($\mathrm{g~m^{-3}}$) or ($\mathrm{Bq~m^{-3}}$) of the trace gas inside the chamber after sufficient time can be obtained by Eq. (2) as

$$
C_{e} = C_{a} + \frac{FS}{u}. \quad (5)
$$

This equation indicates that the sampling of high flow rate can approximate the steady-state concentration $C_{e}$ to the concentration in ambient air $C_{a}$ and leads to minimizing the difference in environmental conditions inside and outside the chamber. At the same time, sufficient quantity of $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ for measurement of $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ activity can be collected under high flow rate.

## 3. Materials and methods

### 3.1. High flow rate $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ sampler
A $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ sampler was developed to obtain the integrated quantity of $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ for measurement of $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ activity in the air drawn with high flow rate. In the sampler, the air introduced by a diaphragm-pump is passed through a filter to remove fine particles and dusts. The flow rate of the sampling is controlled with a gas flow meter in the range from 3 to $15 \mathrm{l~min^{-1}}$. The use of the high flow rate not only minimizes the accumulation of $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ inside the flow-through chamber but also shortens the sampling period required to collect a measurable quantity of $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ in $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$. The integrated air volume is calculated with a dry gas meter during the sampling period. The $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ in the air is collected on two columns filled with about $500 \mathrm{g}$ of molecular sieve 4A.

### 3.2. Site characteristics
Flux measurements were carried out in the Tokai site, JAERI. The surrounding environment was mainly a grove of pine trees on sandy soil with a total porosity of 0.53 (Koarashi, Amano, Andoh, Iida, & Koma, 2001). The soil characteristics of the surface layer from the ground surface to $20 \mathrm{cm}$ depth in the experimental site are shown in Table 1.

**Table 1. Soil characteristics of surface layer in the experimental site**

| Depth (cm) | Soil pH (CaCl₂) | Soil pH (H₂O) | Organic matter (%) |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 0-5 | 5.7 | 6.4 | 7.43 |
| 5-10 | 5.7 | 6.2 | 7.43 |
| 10-15 | 5.9 | 6.6 | 7.43 |
| 15-20 | 6.0 | 6.5 | 7.43 |

### 3.3. Experimental procedures for flux estimation
A flow-through chamber made of polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) with a cross-sectional area of $30 \mathrm{cm} \times 30 \mathrm{cm}$ and a height of $29 \mathrm{cm}$ was used in this study. The chamber is attached onto a groove with rubber packing on a collar made of PMMA when the experiment is just started. The collar had been driven $5 \mathrm{cm}$ into the soil more than six months before the experiments. The internal volume of the chamber is 27 L because there is the groove of the collar sticking $1 \mathrm{cm}$ above the ground surface. This construction enables to reduce the risk of site disturbance in repeated observations at a fixed location.

For outlet of the chamber, a sampling port was installed on one side of the chamber to collect air inside the chamber. For inlet on the side opposite to the outlet, a hood box with an opening area of $375 \mathrm{cm}^{2}$ and $10 \mathrm{cm}$ length was mounted to suppress pressure fluctuations caused directly by outside wind turbulence. The air in the chamber was sucked into the $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ sampler with a high flow rate from the outlet of the chamber. The opening area is wide enough to prevent pulling $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ out of the soil by depressurization due to suction with the sampler.

First, the sampling of the ambient air near the inlet of the chamber was carried out for $4 \mathrm{h}$ at the flow rate of about $14 \mathrm{l~min^{-1}}$. After then, the chamber was attached onto the collar and the air was sampled from the outlet of the flow-through chamber for $4 \mathrm{h}$ at a flow rate of about $14 \mathrm{l~min^{-1}}$. During the sampling from the outlet of the chamber, the $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ concentration inside the chamber was monitored with the IRGA by circulating air.

The collected $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ was degassed from the molecular sieve 4A column to determine the $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ activity. The column was heated to $450^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$ by using an electric furnace. High purity nitrogen gas ($99.99\%$) was flowed through the column at a flow rate of $40 \mathrm{ml~min^{-1}}$. Degassed $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ was trapped in a $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ absorbent of methoxyethylamine (CARBO-SORB E, Packard) cooled with a mixture of water and ice after passing through a molecular sieve 3A column to remove water vapor. Then, the $50 \mathrm{ml}$ absorbent trapping $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ was mixed with a liquid scintillator (PERMA-FLUOR $\mathrm{E}^{+}$, Packard) of $50 \mathrm{ml}$ in a $100 \mathrm{ml}$ Teflon vial. The radioactivity of $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ was measured by a low background liquid scintillation counter (LSC-LBIII, Aloka) with $50 \mathrm{min} \times 20$ counting time. The amount of $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ fixed in the absorbent was evaluated by gravimetry.

To compare with the $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ flux estimated by the proposed flow-through chamber method, the measurement of $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ flux by a closed chamber method was also carried out for the same soil. The accumulation chamber used in this method has the same volume as the flow-through chamber of 27 L and two sampling ports on both the sides.

### 3.4. Determination of $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ activities in environmental materials
Environmental materials such as fresh pine needles, fallen dead pine needles, common grasses of natural growth lying on the ground surface and soil were collected on 13 November 2000 in the vicinity of a place where the flux measurement was made. The collected biological materials were cleaned with distilled water and dried completely at $50^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$. The soil samples were sieved with a 2-mm meshed sieve and dried at $50^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$. Then, all samples were combusted under high oxygen pressure in a tight stainless steel chamber. The combusted gas including $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ was caught by a cold trap using liquid nitrogen. The specific activities of $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ were determined in the same way as mentioned before.

To determine the specific activity of $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ in the atmospheric air, the air at about $2 \mathrm{m}$ above ground surface was collected for $18 \mathrm{h}$ at a flow rate of about $4 \mathrm{l~min^{-1}}$ through a polyethylene tube using the $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ sampler. The soil air was collected by the following procedure. A large closed chamber made of PMMA with a cross-sectional area of $150 \mathrm{cm} \times 20 \mathrm{cm}$ and a height of $50 \mathrm{cm}$ was used to collect the soil air. The chamber is composed of a base part and a cover. The base part of the chamber was inserted $5 \mathrm{cm}$ deep into the soil beforehand. The cover was closed before sampling. The soil air was collected for $6 \mathrm{h}$ at a flow rate of about $7 \mathrm{l~min^{-1}}$ by the $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ sampler from headspace of the chamber.

## 4. Results and discussion

### 4.1. Measurements of $^{14}\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ fluxes
The results of flux measurements performed using the flow-through chamber method in November 2000 are summarized in Table 2. The specific activities of $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ in $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ of the ambient air, collected at the inlet position of the chamber at about $30 \mathrm{cm}$ above the ground surface, ranged from $250.4$ to $275.1 \mathrm{mBq~gC^{-1}}$ with a mean value of $262.4 \mathrm{mBq~gC^{-1}}$. In all experiments, the specific activities of $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ in $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ of the chamber air, collected from the outlet of the chamber, were higher than those collected at the inlet.

**Table 2. Results of flux measurement by the flow-through chamber method**

| Date | Sampling air | Sampling period | Collected air (m³) | Air flow rate (l min⁻¹) | Collected CO₂ (g) | ¹⁴C specific activity in CO₂ (mBq gC⁻¹) | Collected ¹⁴CO₂ (mBq) |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 06 Nov. 2000 | Ambient air | 10:37–14:37 | 3.37 | 14.0 | 2.3 | $257.0 \pm 9.6$ᵃ | 161.2 |
| 06 Nov. 2000 | Chamber air | 15:01–19:06 | 3.39 | 13.8 | 2.5 | $280.5 \pm 11.2$ | 191.3 |
| 13 Nov. 2000 | Ambient air | 10:01–14:01 | 3.35 | 14.0 | 2.5 | $266.9 \pm 9.8$ | 182.0 |
| 13 Nov. 2000 | Chamber air | 14:45–18:46 | 3.36 | 14.0 | 2.7 | $296.3 \pm 11.5$ | 217.3 |
| 22 Nov. 2000 | Ambient air | 10:26–14:26 | 3.30 | 13.8 | 2.5 | $250.4 \pm 8.9$ | 170.7 |
| 22 Nov. 2000 | Chamber air | 14:44–18:44 | 3.29 | 13.7 | 2.6 | $275.4 \pm 8.8$ | 195.3 |
| 28 Nov. 2000 | Ambient air | 9:56–13:56 | 3.31 | 13.8 | 2.5 | $275.1 \pm 12.1$ | 180.1 |
| 28 Nov. 2000 | Chamber air | 14:36–18:36 | 3.30 | 13.7 | 2.6 | $307.6 \pm 9.0$ | 218.1 |

*ᵃ Counting error ($1\sigma$)*

**Table 3. Fluxes of $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ and $^{14}\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ at soil-atmosphere interface**

| Date | Method | Sampling period | CO₂ flux (g m⁻² h⁻¹) | ¹⁴CO₂ flux (Bq m⁻² s⁻¹) |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 06 Nov. 2000 | Flow-through (gravimetry) | 15:01–19:06 | 0.50 | $2.19 \times 10^{-5}$ |
| 06 Nov. 2000 | Closed | 14:36–14:56 | 0.14 | — |
| 06 Nov. 2000 | Flow-through (IRGA) | 15:01–19:06 | 0.14 | — |
| 06 Nov. 2000 | Combined | — | 0.14 | $1.41 \times 10^{-5}$ |
| 13 Nov. 2000 | Flow-through (gravimetry) | 14:45–18:46 | 0.54 | $2.71 \times 10^{-5}$ |
| 13 Nov. 2000 | Closed | 14:10–14:30 | 0.11 | — |
| 13 Nov. 2000 | Flow-through (IRGA) | 14:45–18:46 | 0.14 | — |
| 13 Nov. 2000 | Combined | — | 0.11 | $1.74 \times 10^{-5}$ |
| 22 Nov. 2000 | Flow-through (gravimetry) | 14:44–18:44 | 0.30 | $1.96 \times 10^{-5}$ |
| 22 Nov. 2000 | Closed | 14:11–14:31 | 0.16 | — |
| 22 Nov. 2000 | Flow-through (IRGA) | 14:44–18:44 | 0.12 | — |
| 22 Nov. 2000 | Combined | — | 0.16 | $1.59 \times 10^{-5}$ |
| 28 Nov. 2000 | Flow-through (gravimetry) | 14:36–18:36 | 0.32 | $2.45 \times 10^{-5}$ |
| 28 Nov. 2000 | Closed | 13:45–14:05 | 0.15 | — |
| 28 Nov. 2000 | Flow-through (IRGA) | 14:36–18:36 | 0.10 | — |
| 28 Nov. 2000 | Combined | — | 0.15 | $1.62 \times 10^{-5}$ |

The combined method was developed to reduce the effect of the error on $^{14}\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ flux estimation. In the combined method, the amounts of $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ collected at the inlet and outlet positions of the chamber were calculated by $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ concentration in ambient air, $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ flux obtained by the closed chamber method and Eq. (3). The amounts of $^{14}\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ collected at the inlet and outlet were obtained from the amounts of $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ calculated and $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ specific activities measured by the flow-through chamber method, respectively. Using these amounts of $^{14}\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ and Eq. (4), the $^{14}\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ flux was estimated to be $1.41 \times 10^{-5} - 1.74 \times 10^{-5} \mathrm{Bq} \mathrm{m}^{-2} \mathrm{s}^{-1}$ with a mean value of $1.59 \times 10^{-5} \mathrm{Bq} \mathrm{m}^{-2} \mathrm{s}^{-1}$, as shown in Table 3.

### 4.2. Distribution of $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ in forest ecosystem
The specific activities of $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ in the environmental materials in the forest ecosystem are shown in Table 4. The $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ activity of the soil could not be determined because of a little soil organic matter in the experimental site. The overall view of the spatial distribution of $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ in the forest ecosystem is illustrated in Fig. 2. The specific activity in atmospheric $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ at about $2 \mathrm{m}$ above the ground surface was $237.6 \mathrm{mBq~gC^{-1}}$. The fresh pine needles had a similar $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ specific activity to the atmospheric $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ at about $2 \mathrm{m}$ above the ground surface due to its fairly rapid equilibrium. No significant difference between the specific activity of $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ in the fresh and dead pine needles was observed. On the other hand, living common grasses lying on the ground surface had a high $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ specific activity compared with other biological materials. Further, $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ specific activity in the soil $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ was higher than the atmospheric $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$. The specific activity of $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ in the atmospheric $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ decreases with increase of height from the ground surface. It explains that $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ specific activity in the $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ has a concentration gradient near the ground surface. The $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ with high $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ specific activity should be generated by decomposition of soil organic matter which may have been accumulated in the soil as a result of former nuclear weapons tests.

**Table 4. Specific activities of $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ in environmental materials**

| Material | Date | ¹⁴C specific activity (mBq gC⁻¹) | Sampling situation |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Fresh pine needles | 13 Nov. 2000 | $222.6 \pm 3.3$ᵃ | About 2 m above ground |
| Dead pine needles | 13 Nov. 2000 | $217.9 \pm 5.1$ | Lying on the ground |
| Common grasses | 13 Nov. 2000 | $273.6 \pm 7.4$ | Lying on the ground |
| Soil | 13 Nov. 2000 | — | — |
| Atmospheric air | 15 Dec. 2000 | $237.6 \pm 4.9$ | About 2 m above ground |
| Soil air | 20 Dec. 2000 | $304.5 \pm 5.9$ | Headspace of closed chamber |

*ᵃ Counting error ($1\sigma$).*

## 5. Conclusions
A method based on the flow-through chamber system which can maintain the environmental condition with the minimal disturbance of surface soil and a high flow rate $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ sampler were developed to determine in situ $^{14}\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ flux at the soil-atmosphere interface. This method allowed us to collect the integrated quantity of $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ for measuring $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ activity over an extended time period. The flow-through chamber method was modeled and analyzed to estimate the gas flux. The model improved defects that the gas flux might be significantly underestimated and that a longer sampling period was required on the conventional flow-through chamber method. Using the method, the $^{14}\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ flux from the ground surface was estimated to $1.41 - 1.74 \times 10^{-5} \mathrm{Bq} \mathrm{m}^{-2} \mathrm{s}^{-1}$ with a mean value of $1.59 \times 10^{-5} \mathrm{Bq} \mathrm{m}^{-2} \mathrm{s}^{-1}$ in November 2000 in a forest floor in JAERI. This method would be useful not only to compare the $^{14}\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ fluxes in various environments but also to clarify the seasonal variation of the $^{14}\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ flux.

The specific activities of $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ in environmental materials such as some pine needles, grasses, atmospheric $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ and soil $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ were measured to discuss the behavior of $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ in the forest ecosystem. The fresh pine needles had a similar $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ specific activity to the atmospheric $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ at about $2 \mathrm{m}$ above the ground surface due to its fairly rapid equilibrium. No significant difference between the specific activity of $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ in the fresh and dead pine needles was observed. On the other hand, the living common grasses lying on the ground surface had a higher $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ specific activity compared with other biological materials. Further, the $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ specific activity in the soil $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ was higher than the atmospheric $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ and the specific activity in the atmospheric $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ decreased with increase of the height from the ground surface. These indicate that the $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ specific activity in $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ has a concentration gradient near the ground surface and the $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ with high $^{14}\mathrm{C}$ specific activity is generated by the decomposition of the soil organic matter which may have been accumulated in the soil as a result of former nuclear weapons tests.