# Assessing the variability of tissue-free water tritium and non-exchangeable organically bound tritium in pine needles in Fukushima using atmospheric tritrated water vapor

Shigekazu Hirao a, Hideki Kakiuchi b, Naofumi Akata c, Toshiya Tamari d, Shinji Sugihara e, Nagayoshi Shima d, Masahiro Tanaka f

a Institute of Environmental Radioactivity, Fukushima University, 1 Kanagawawa, Fukushima-shi, Fukushima 960-1296, Japan
b Institute for Environmental Sciences, 1-7 Ienomae, Obuchi, Rokkasho-mura, Kamikita-gun, Aomori 039-3212, Japan
c Hirosaki University, 66-1 Hon-cho, Hirosaki-shi, Aomori 036-8564, Japan
d Kyushu Environmental Evaluation Association, 1-10-1 Matsukadai, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka-shi, Fukuoka 813-0004, Japan
e Kyushu University, 744 Motooka, Nishi-ku, Fukuoka-shi, Fukuoka 819-0395, Japan
f National Institute for Fusion Science, National Institutes of Natural Sciences, 322-6 Oroshi-cho, Toki-shi, Gifu 509-5292, Japan

*Science of the Total Environment* 903 (2023) 166526

**HIGHLIGHTS**

- TFWT and NE-OBT concentrations in pine needles near the FDNPP were investigated.
- Both were correlated with time-averaged atmospheric HTO concentrations.
- The NE-OBT/TFWT ratio was obtained based on the vegetation growth season.

**GRAPHICAL ABSTRACT**
*[Image: Graphical abstract]*

**ARTICLE INFO**

*Editor:* Elena Paoletti

*Keywords:*
Tritium
Non-exchangeable organically bound tritium
Tissue-free water tritium
Tritiated water vapor
HTO
Pine needles

**ABSTRACT**

When conducting environmental tritium monitoring at nuclear and fusion facilities, it is important to understand how tritium concentrations vary within the soil-plant-atmosphere continuum. Past measurements of organically bound tritium (OBT) concentrations have been conducted from the standpoint of ascertaining the persistence of tritium in terrestrial vegetation, and it has been reported that OBT concentrations fluctuate depending on the influence of atmospheric sources and meteorological conditions. The present study provides information on the variability of tritium concentrations in vegetation growing close to atmospheric sources of tritiated water (HTO) in Japan. We conducted measurements of tissue-free water tritium (TFWT) and non-exchangeable OBT (NE-OBT) in pine needles collected from locations near the Tokyo Electric Power Company's Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant from 2018 to 2021. The results we obtained indicate that TFWT concentrations fluctuate in response to short-term changes in atmospheric HTO vapor concentrations and that NE-OBT concentrations vary primarily in response to the time-averaged TFWT concentration during the pine needle growing season, which is in turn mainly determined by atmospheric HTO vapor concentrations. Although it is difficult to ascertain the time-averaged TFWT concentration during the growing season by measuring plant materials, our results show that the measurement of atmospheric HTO vapor concentrations provides an effective alternative method of doing this. We believe our findings can lead to better understanding of the potential impact on the terrestrial environment associated with the atmospheric discharge of HTO and can contribute to improving the strategy of environmental tritium monitoring.

## 1. Introduction

Tritium (³H or T) is a radioactive isotope of hydrogen with a half-life of 12.33 years. Environmental monitoring of tritium is conducted for safety evaluation purposes because the total tritium activity discharged from nuclear facilities into the environment is the largest among all radionuclides, followed by that of the radioactive noble gases (UNSCEAR, 2016). Tritium in the environment originates mainly from a combination of naturally occurring cosmic ray spallation in the upper atmosphere and anthropogenic sources of nuclear fission, including atmospheric nuclear weapons tests conducted between 1945 and 1963 and the operation of nuclear reactors. Changes in the relative contributions of each of these sources result in variations in tritium concentrations in the environment. From the standpoints of both abundance and mobility, the most important compound of tritium is water (Murphy Jr., 1993; Feng et al., 2022). Tritium in tritiated water (HTO) is rapidly incorporated into the complex system formed by the atmosphere, pedosphere, hydrosphere and biosphere, and enters the human body through both inhalation of air and ingestion of food and water (Eyrolle et al., 2018). In the interest of conducting realistic human dose assessment, it is necessary to elucidate the behavior of tritium on the pathway between the sources and the human recipients. In particular, it is essential to understand the causes of the variations in tritium concentrations found in plants (Okada and Momoshima, 1993).

The main processes associated with variations in tritium concentrations in plants are 1) vapor exchange between the atmosphere and plants, 2) translocation from soil to plants, and 3) production of organic matter through photosynthesis (Belot, 1986; Boyer et al., 2009). In order to understand the behavior of tritium within the soil-plant-atmosphere continuum, tritium concentrations in plants have been evaluated for tissue-free water tritium (TFWT) and organically bound tritium (OBT) (Diabate and Strack, 1993). Previously reported TFWT and OBT concentrations in plants at sites where no contribution from atmospheric sources has been observed have tended to fluctuate within the range of a few Bq or less, a level comparable to that of atmospheric HTO vapor concentrations (Pointurier et al., 2003; Akata et al., 2015). TFWT and OBT concentrations detected close to sources such as heavy water reactors and nuclear fuel recycling plants have been reported to have reached as high as approximately 10³ Bq dm⁻³ (Kim et al., 2000; Le Dizes et al., 2017). TFWT concentrations fluctuate continuously to approach equilibrium with HTO in the atmosphere or HTO in soil water. Therefore, TFWT concentrations in vegetation are regarded as reflecting the environmental tritium concentration at the time of sample collection (Galeriu et al., 2013). By contrast, OBT concentrations in plants reflect variations in environmental tritium concentrations during the growing season, making them a very important monitoring target.

OBT can be divided into non-exchangeable OBT (NE-OBT), which is tightly bound to organic molecules, and exchangeable OBT (E-OBT), which is less tightly bound and can be easily released into the surrounding environment (Diabate and Strack, 1993). E-OBT concentrations are highly variable because E-OBT can be replaced by tritium and hydrogen in tissue-free water through isotope exchange reactions. Such momentary fluctuations can be a source of uncertainty when evaluating OBT concentrations, so NE-OBT concentrations should be measured in order to obtain more accurate estimates of tritium behavior in vegetation (Kim and Baumgartner, 1994). In addition, during OBT synthesis and catabolism, differences in mass between isotopes result in isotopic fractionation (Le Goff et al., 2014). The OBT/TFWT ratio in plants has been used to gain greater understanding of the persistence of tritium in terrestrial vegetation, including the role of isotopic fractionation, but challenges remain due to the high variability of this ratio (Korolevych et al., 2014; Thompson et al., 2015). There are significant differences in measured OBT/TFWT ratio values in plants between laboratory and field experiments. The results of laboratory experiments suggest that the OBT/TFWT ratio is less than unity (Garland and Ameen, 1979; Kim and Baumgartner, 1994). In contrast, tritium accumulation in OBT is often observed in field measurements of terrestrial vegetation, suggesting an OBT/TFWT ratio greater than unity (Momoshima et al., 2000; Jean-Baptiste et al., 2011). As Peterson and Davis (2002) have pointed out, this difference can be attributed to the difference in residence time between TFWT and OBT. For this reason, it is necessary to consider whether tritium concentrations in samples at the time of collection are temporally and spatially representative of the concentrations in the environment.

The amount of OBT produced depends on numerous environmental factors and plant parameters, including light intensity, photosynthetic rate, temperature, atmospheric turbulence, and water uptake, all of which have been observed to exhibit considerable variation in experiments (Kim et al., 2013). The OBT/TFWT ratio can vary depending on the climate region. In Japan, which is characterized by a humid subtropical climate, pine needles have been used as an appropriate indicator for ascertaining the concentrations of airborne radionuclides and the degree of uptake of these radionuclides into vegetation (Momoshima et al., 1987; Takashima et al., 1987; Hisamatsu et al., 1998; Akata et al., 2015; Tanaka et al., 2019). These studies focused mainly on investigating the background variability in TFWT and OBT. Little data is available to assess TFWT and NE-OBT concentrations in the vicinity of atmospheric sources in Japan (Matsuura et al., 1995; Fujita et al., 2007). As such, it is difficult to assess how tritium is distributed within the soil-plant-atmosphere continuum.

In order to fill in the remaining gaps in our knowledge of tritium migration, our team established a measurement network to study atmospheric HTO vapor concentrations in the initial research phase after the nuclear accident in the area surrounding the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant (FDNPP), which is operated by the Tokyo Electric Power Company (TEPCO) (Hirao and Kakiuchi, 2021; Hirao et al., 2022). As a result of obtaining measurements of elevated atmospheric HTO vapor concentrations close to the FDNPP, we hypothesized that the release of substantial amounts of HTO into the atmosphere could affect the variability of tritium concentrations in vegetation growing in the area. In keeping with our objective of assessing the variability of the TFWT and NE-OBT concentrations in vegetation growing in the vicinity of the FDNPP, which we surmised to be a significant source of atmospheric tritium in Japan, we observed TFWT and NE-OBT concentrations in fresh pine needles collected from sites close to the FDNPP and analyzed the relationship between the TFWT and NE-OBT concentrations by measuring atmospheric HTO vapor concentrations. While up to now, tritium concentration variability in plants has been discussed only in terms of TFWT and OBT concentrations, the quantitative evaluation of TFWT and NE-OBT concentration variability described in this study, when analyzed in conjunction with atmospheric HTO information, represents a novel approach. This study provides scientific insight into the tritium cycle as it affects vegetation in a humid subtropical climate with high precipitation, and will be helpful in assessing the potential impact on the terrestrial environment associated with the recently commenced discharge of ALPS (Advanced Liquid Processing System) treated water stored at the site of the FDNPP into the ocean.

In this study, our aim was to detect the tritium level for TFWT and NE-OBT in pine needles near the FDNPP in Japan and to quantify the impact of atmospheric HTO emissions on TFWT and NE-OBT in a humid subtropical climate. We hypothesized that TFWT is varied in short-term primarily by foliar uptake of atmospheric HTO vapor that is changed drastically in response to the HTO plume arrival and departure, but that NE-OBT is characterized by the history of photosynthesis process and long-term HTO exposure during the growing period.

## 2. Materials and methods

### 2.1. Sampling locations

The sampling locations were selected to capture variations in the TFWT and NE-OBT concentrations in the vicinity of the FDNPP at Site-A (37.404°N, 140.982°E), Site-B (37.413°N, 141.023°E) and Site-C (37.429°N, 141.012°E). These three sites are located approximately 5 km west-southwest, 1 km south, and 2 km west of the center of the FDNPP, respectively, as shown in Fig. 1. The sites were selected on the basis of accessibility and sampling permissions during periods when decontamination activities were being performed. All of the sampling sites were located in rural environments, where one or two Japanese pine trees several meters tall were growing apart from other trees. Fresh pine needles from different growth years were separately collected from the branches of each tree at a height of 1–2 m above the ground. Approximately 500 g of pine needles were collected to obtain a sufficient quantity of combustion water for radioanalysis. The sampling effort was focused mainly on the pine needles at Site-B because significantly high tritium concentrations were observed in the atmosphere at this site in a previous study (Hirao et al., 2022). Sampling was conducted from 2018 to 2021. The number of sets of samples taken was two sets at Site-A, 11 sets at Site-B, and one set at Site-C. Monthly atmospheric HTO vapor concentrations were continuously monitored throughout the 2018–2021 sampling period near the pine trees, using passive samplers located at a distance from the trees of about 20 m at Site-A and Site-B, and about 200 m at Site-C. The measurements of atmospheric HTO vapor concentrations at Site-C began in April 2020.

*[Fig. 1. Locations of the sampling sites. Cs-137 concentration in soil from airborne monitoring results (unmanned helicopter) on December 2019 by the Japan Atomic Energy Agency (JAEA, 2021).]*

### 2.2. Sample preparation and radioactivity analysis

Samples each consisting of approximately 500 g of the current year's and the previous year's fresh pine needles were collected using disposable rubber gloves and packed into water-vapor-tight laminated bags. This prevented any potential exchange between TFWT and atmospheric HTO vapor during transport from the sampling locations to the laboratory. In the laboratory, the samples were kept frozen until HTO extraction.

TFWT in the pine needles was separated from the frozen samples using freeze-drying techniques and recovered by cold trapping (Takashima et al., 1987; Tamari et al., 2011; Akata et al., 2015). The dried samples were rinsed with tritium-depleted water to remove E-OBT (Akata et al., 2019). The samples were then immersed in tritium-depleted water for 24 h and lyophilized for several days. This process was repeated three times. NE-OBT was separated from the rinsed samples using combustion techniques and recovered by cold trapping. The recovered water was purified by reflux and distillation with potassium permanganate KMnO₄ until no significant absorption peak was observed by using UV spectrophotometer (UV-2600, SHIMADZU Co., LTD., Kyoto, Japan).

Atmospheric HTO vapor was collected by using a passive sampler (Hirao and Kakiuchi, 2021). Simultaneously, a temperature and humidity monitor (HOBO U23 Pro v2; Onset Computer Corporation, Bourne, MA) was set in order to determine the absolute humidity. Molecular sieves 3A (MS3A 1/16; FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemical Corporation, Osaka, Japan) were used to absorb the HTO vapor. The HTO absorbed by MS3A was extracted by heating and recovered by cold trapping.

The HTO activity of the recovered water after distillation was measured using a low-background liquid scintillation counter (LSC: LB7, Nippon RayTech Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) for a total counting time of approximately 1000 min after the sample had been stabilized for several days. 0.05 dm³ of distilled water and 0.05 dm³ of liquid scintillation cocktail Ultima Gold LLT (Perkin Elmer, Waltham, MA, USA) were well mixed in a 145 dm³ low-diffusion polyethylene vial. The background count rate and counting efficiency were approximately 3.0 cpm and 20%, respectively. A typical detection limit for tritium in water was 0.35 Bq dm⁻³ with a 95% confidence interval following the definition in ISO 11929:2010 (ISO, 2010).

The TFWT and atmospheric HTO concentrations in the samples (Bq dm⁻³) were obtained directly from the radioactivity measurements. The NE-OBT concentrations were expressed in Bq dm⁻³ combustion water (cw) as the tritium activity of the combustion water after correcting for dilution due to the rinsing to remove E-OBT, and in Bq kg⁻¹ dry weight (dw) as the tritium activity of the dried samples, in consideration of the hydrogen content as determined using a CHN analyzer (Micro Corder CHN Corder MT-6, YANACO Co., Ltd., Kyoto, Japan).

### 2.3. Estimation of TFWT and NE-OBT concentrations

The mechanisms of uptake and incorporation of HTO in plants have been investigated in many studies (Belot, 1986; Murphy Jr., 1993; Boyer et al., 2009). The main pathways for tritium uptake into plants are foliar uptake of tritium from the atmosphere, including transpiration of tritium through leaf stomata, and root uptake of tritium from the soil. TFWT is incorporated into organisms through photosynthesis as OBT. Model estimation of tritium concentrations in plants requires the accurate representation of numerous physicochemical and biological processes. Sophisticated models incorporating these processes can reproduce short-term exposure conditions with high accuracy (Ota and Nagai, 2011). However, achieving high calculation accuracy for long-term integration remains an issue for the future (Melintescu and Galeriu, 2017). In this study, a static model based on the specific activity approach was used to evaluate the variability of the TFWT and NE-OBT concentrations.

The TFWT concentration in pine needles, *C*_TFWT (Bq dm⁻³), was calculated based on a steady-state solution for the dynamic transfer of HTO in plant leaves (Melintescu and Galeriu, 2005) as follows:

\[
C_{\text{TFWT}} = \alpha_{\text{eq}} h C_{\text{air}} + \alpha_{\text{eq}} \alpha_{\text{k}} (1 - h) C_{\text{sol}}, \quad (1)
\]

where *C*_air (Bq dm⁻³) is the atmospheric HTO concentration, *C*_sol (Bq dm⁻³) is the HTO concentration in soil water, *h* is the relative humidity, α_eq = 1.1 is the equilibrium fractionation factor between liquid water and water vapor (Sepall and Mason, 1960), and α_k = 1.026 is the kinetic fractionation factor associated with diffusion (Cuntz et al., 2007).

The NE-OBT concentration, *C*_NE-OBT (Bq kg⁻¹ dw), was calculated based on the photosynthetic TFWT assimilation flux and the daytime carbohydrate flux (Ota and Nagai, 2011) as follows:

\[
C_{\text{NE-OBT}} = f_{\text{ne}} f_{\text{id}} f_{\text{C}} C_{\text{TFWT}}, \quad (2)
\]

where *f*_ne = 0.79 is the fraction of non-exchangeable hydrogen (Guenot and Belot, 1984), *f*_id is the isotope discrimination factor (i.e., the ratio between tritium and hydrogen, T/H) during photosynthesis, and *f*_C = 0.6 is the stoichiometric factor related to the mass ratio of water (H₂O) to formaldehyde (CH₂O) during photosynthesis. The isotope discrimination factor was determined so that the estimated and measured NE-OBT concentrations would match, as is discussed in the Discussion section. The value of *f*_ne *f*_id is equal to the partition coefficient based on the definition specified by the IAEA (IAEA, 2009) that takes into account the reduction in dry weight concentration due to the presence of exchangeable hydrogen in the combustion water, as well as isotope discrimination.

## 3. Results

The TFWT and NE-OBT concentrations in pine needles collected in the vicinity of the FDNPP during the period 2018–2021 are presented in Table 1.

**Table 1. TFWT and NE-OBT concentrations in pine needles.**

| Location | Date (dd/mm/yyyy) | Needles age | TFWT (Bq dm⁻³) | NE-OBT in combustion water (Bq dm⁻³ cw) | H content (%) | NE-OBT in dried samples (Bq kg⁻¹ dw) |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Site-A | 02/06/2019 | Previous year | 1.50 ± 0.10 | 0.72 ± 0.19 | 6.76 | 0.35 ± 0.09 |
| | 03/11/2021 | Current year | 0.97 ± 0.15 | 0.52 ± 0.12 | 6.53 | 0.24 ± 0.06 |
| Site-B | 08/09/2018 | Current year | 5.02 ± 0.58 | 3.41 ± 0.39 | 6.50 | 1.58 ± 0.18 |
| | 08/09/2018 | Previous year | 5.25 ± 0.60 | 4.68 ± 0.39 | 6.58 | 2.27 ± 0.16 |
| | 02/09/2018 | Previous year | 25.72 ± 0.32 | 4.20 ± 0.25 | 6.65 | 1.98 ± 0.10 |
| | 10/05/2019 | Current year | 4.95 ± 0.18 | 4.77 ± 0.35 | 6.71 | 2.19 ± 0.18 |
| | 18/09/2019 | Current year | 4.05 ± 0.16 | 4.18 ± 0.22 | 6.65 | 1.99 ± 0.12 |
| | 26/09/2019 | Previous year | 3.78 ± 0.17 | 3.83 ± 0.22 | 6.68 | 1.82 ± 0.11 |
| | 06/06/2020 | Current year | 28.97 ± 0.29 | 4.71 ± 0.22 | 6.75 | 2.26 ± 0.10 |
| | 06/06/2020 | Previous year | 3.68 ± 0.16 | 4.28 ± 0.12 | 6.57 | 2.00 ± 0.06 |
| | 30/10/2020 | Current year | 14.40 ± 0.18 | 3.48 ± 0.16 | 6.50 | 1.61 ± 0.07 |
| | 03/11/2021 | Current year | 1.38 ± 0.18 | 1.04 ± 0.16 | 6.65 | 0.49 ± 0.08 |
| Site-C | 03/11/2021 | Current year | 0.36 ± 0.18 | 0.67 ± 0.13 | 6.63 | 0.32 ± 0.06 |

cw = combustion water, dw = dry weight.
¹ The one standard deviation of counting error.

### 3.1. TFWT concentrations in pine needles

Measured TFWT concentrations in pine needles varied widely from sample to sample, ranging from 0.36 Bq dm⁻³ to 28.97 Bq dm⁻³. The TFWT concentrations in the samples from Site-B were higher than in those from the other sampling locations. TFWT concentrations varied according to the timing of sampling as well as the sampling location. In the samples at Site-B, significant increases were observed in May 2019, June 2020 and November 2021. We consider that these increases were probably caused by plumes containing high atmospheric HTO vapor concentrations, based on the results of our previous study in which a short-term observation conducted at the same time at Site-B on May 22, 2019 measured an atmospheric HTO vapor concentration of 32 Bq dm⁻³ (Hirao et al., 2022).

### 3.2. Hydrogen content in pine needles

The hydrogen content of the collected pine needles ranged between 6.50% and 6.76% with an average of 6.6%, indicating that the hydrogen content was largely constant regardless of leaf age, sampling location, and timing of sampling. These results are consistent with literature values for the mean hydrogen content of a number of major components of organic materials, namely 6.2%, 6.8% and 6.8% for cellulose, starches and proteins, respectively (Diabate and Strack, 1993). The ratios of non-exchangeable hydrogen to total hydrogen are theoretically given as 70% by weight for cellulose, 72% for starches, and 75% for proteins (Diabate and Strack, 1993). Several studies have shown that a fraction of the E-OBT may remain in dry matter as buried tritium, even after isotopic exchanges with tritium-depleted water during the rinsing process (Baumgartner and Donhaerl, 2004; Le Goff et al., 2014; Nivesse et al., 2021). Therefore, it is reasonable to assume a relatively large fraction of non-exchangeable hydrogen, on the order of 79% to compensate for the dilution of NE-OBT concentration due to rinsing.

### 3.3. NE-OBT concentrations in pine needles

Concentrations of NE-OBT in combustion water obtained from the samples varied from 0.52 to 4.77 Bq dm⁻³ cw. The corresponding NE-OBT concentrations in dried samples ranged from 0.24 to 2.27 Bq kg⁻¹ dw. Compared to the variation in TFWT concentrations, the variation in NE-OBT concentrations between samples was small. Moreover, there were no substantial differences in NE-OBT concentration between the current year's and the previous year's pine needles. NE-OBT concentrations at Site-B were markedly higher than that at the other sampling locations, as was the case for TFWT concentrations.

### 3.4. Tritium concentration for atmospheric water vapor

The composite monthly mean atmospheric HTO vapor concentrations are shown in Fig. 2. The monthly concentrations varied from below the detection limit of 0.3 to 1.27 Bq dm⁻³ (mean: 0.66 Bq dm⁻³) at Site-A, from 1.53 to 8.70 Bq dm⁻³ (mean: 4.54 Bq dm⁻³) at Site-B, and from 0.63 to 2.68 Bq dm⁻³ (mean: 1.34 Bq dm⁻³) at Site-C. The error bars represent the standard deviation of the mean values for each month. The errors for Site-C were not calculated because measurements at Site-C began in April 2020. The mean relative error was 38% for Site-A and 28% for Site-B, indicating substantial interannual variability in atmospheric HTO vapor concentration. Considering the degree of deviation, there were no significant seasonal variations in atmospheric HTO. Although detailed results are not presented here, there were clear seasonal variations in the temperature and relative humidity observed in the region, with higher temperatures in summer from July to September and lower temperatures in winter from December to February. The annual mean temperature and the annual mean relative humidity were 16°C and 71%, respectively.

*[Fig. 2. Monthly variation in composite mean of atmospheric HTO vapor concentrations at Site-A, Site-B and Site-C. The error bar represents the standard deviation of the composite mean.]*

### 3.5. Relationship between TFWT and NE-OBT

The relationship between the TFWT concentrations and NE-OBT concentrations in combustion water was examined as shown in Fig. 3. There appears to be 1:1 relationship between TFWT and NE-OBT concentrations, with three notable exceptions in which significant increases in TFWT concentrations were observed. The NE-OBT/TFWT ratio ranged between 0.16 and 3.4, with an arithmetic mean of 1.0 and a geometric mean of 0.74. The wide range displayed by the NE-OBT/TFWT ratio was expected, due to the greater variability in TFWT concentrations than in NE-OBT concentrations. In response to the rapid exchange of water vapor through leaf stomata, TFWT concentrations can vary over periods of minutes to hours until equilibrium is reached with atmospheric HTO and soil HTO concentrations (Belot et al., 1979). TFWT concentrations in the samples may have been strongly influenced by fluctuations in atmospheric HTO vapor concentrations, given the sampling location near the Pacific Ocean as well as the potential impact of the FDNPP as a source. Accordingly, it is improbable that the measured TFWT concentrations are representative of their mean value during the pine needle growing season. Therefore, the mean atmospheric HTO vapor concentration has been used to explain the variability in NE-OBT concentrations.

*[Fig. 3. Relationship between the TFWT and NE-OBT concentrations in pine needles. The dashed line corresponds to the one-to-one reference line.]*

### 3.6. Relationship between atmospheric HTO and NE-OBT

The relationship between NE-OBT concentrations in combustion water and time-averaged atmospheric HTO vapor concentrations was analyzed. The pine needle growing season was assumed to be the period from June to the month of measurement for the current year's pine needles, and from June of the previous year to the month of collection for the previous year's pine needles. Time-averaged atmospheric HTO vapor concentration values were calculated as the arithmetic mean over the period of the growing season. As shown in Fig. 4, NE-OBT concentrations were strongly correlated with time-averaged atmospheric HTO vapor concentration values. The slope of the regression line, at 0.84, was slightly lower than unity, suggesting dilution by soil water with lower HTO concentrations. Instantaneous increases in TFWT concentrations (indicated by open symbols in Fig. 4) at the time of sampling are not considered to have had a significant effect on NE-OBT concentrations.

*[Fig. 4. Relationship between the time-averaged atmospheric HTO vapor and NE-OBT concentrations in pine needles. The solid line is the least squares regression fit to the data. The dashed line represents the one-to-one line.]*

### 3.7. Comparison with other reported values in Japan

The tritium concentrations obtained in this study are similar to or slightly higher than those found in historical data on Japanese vegetation, but the TFWT and NE-OBT concentrations obtained in this study are lower than those found in some cases of accidental atmospheric release in Japan. TFWT and OBT concentrations in pine needles were found to be in the range of 0.76–3.05 Bq dm⁻³ and 1.40–3.59 Bq dm⁻³ cw from a Japanese national survey conducted in 1983 (Takashima et al., 1987), and 0.32–0.92 Bq dm⁻³ and 0.33–1.10 Bq dm⁻³ cw from surveys conducted in Gifu Prefecture from 1998 to 2017, respectively (Akata et al., 2015; Tanaka et al., 2019). Samples collected in the vicinity of operating research reactors and tritium-handling facilities in Ibaraki Prefecture from 1984 to 1993 showed relatively high average annual TFWT concentrations ranging from 1.4 to 31 Bq dm⁻³ (Matsuura et al., 1995), which are comparable to the results obtained in the present study. Moreover, after the FDNPP accident on 12 April 2011, the observed TFWT concentration in unidentified herbaceous vegetation 20 km north-west of FDNPP was 167 Bq dm⁻³ (Kakiuchi et al., 2012), which was much higher than the concentrations obtained in this study.

## 4. Discussion

We observed TFWT and NE-OBT concentrations in pine needles in the vicinity of the FDNPP and found a clear relationship between NE-OBT concentrations in combustion water and time-averaged atmospheric HTO vapor concentrations over the course of the pine needle growing season. Static model estimates of TFWT and NE-OBT concentrations were used to further examine tritium transport within the soil-plant-atmosphere continuum.

### 4.1. Variability in TFWT and NE-OBT

In the present study, HTO concentrations in soil water were not measured. Based on our previous study (Hirao and Kakiuchi, 2021), HTO concentrations in soil water ranged from 0.73 to 3.1 Bq dm⁻³ and the ratio of HTO concentrations in soil water to atmospheric HTO vapor concentrations ranged from 0.14 to 0.49. In consideration of this result, we used an assumed mean ratio *C*_sol / *C*_air of 0.35 to determine HTO concentrations in soil water from time-averaged atmospheric HTO vapor concentrations during the growing season. Using the time-averaged values of the observed relative humidity and atmospheric HTO vapor concentration, and the assumed HTO concentration in soil water, Eqs. (1) and (2) provide estimated values of the TFWT concentrations and NE-OBT concentrations in dried samples. A comparison between the measured and estimated values is shown in Fig. 5.

*[Fig. 5. Comparison between measured and estimated (a) TFWT and (b) NE-OBT concentrations in pine needles. The solid line represents perfect agreement and the dashed lines represent (a) ± factor of 10 differences from that line and (b) ± factor of 1.5, respectively.]*

Fig. 5(a) suggests that the TFWT concentrations measured at the time of sampling differed substantially from the time-averaged TFWT concentrations during the growing season. The ratio of measured to estimated TFWT concentrations varied between 0.22 and 7.5, indicating that the TFWT concentrations at the time of sampling varied by an order of magnitude from the time-averaged TFWT concentrations during the growing season. We consider this variation to be mainly attributable to i) the arrival of atmospheric plumes, and ii) exchanges between continental and oceanic air masses. In fact, some of the measured TFWT concentrations were lower than the estimated time-averaged concentrations. This implies that TFWT concentrations decrease when an oceanic air mass with a low atmospheric HTO vapor concentration dominates after an atmospheric plume has passed. This result is a typical case of short-range atmospheric transport of radionuclides near an atmospheric source (Hirao and Yamazawa, 2010).

The estimated NE-OBT concentrations were consistent with the measured NE-OBT concentrations in dried samples, as shown in Fig. 5(b). This indicates that the NE-OBT concentrations at the time of sampling can be regarded as representing the time-averaged concentrations during growing season. The ratio of the measured to estimated values ranged from 0.75 to 1.5, indicating the estimation accuracy by a factor of 1.5. The best-fit value for the isotope discrimination factor *f*_id was 0.84, which is within the reported value range of 0.65 to 0.9 but relatively high among these values (McFarlane, 1976; Guenot and Belot, 1984; Diabate and Strack, 1993; Peterson and Davis, 2002). The estimated value for the isotope discrimination factor turned out to be the same as the slope of regression line for the relationship between the atmospheric HTO vapor and NE-OBT (Fig. 4), but this is considered to be only coincidence. We calculated a partition coefficient value of 0.67. This value is generally consistent with previously reported values of around 0.6 (Kim and Baumgartner, 1994). This indicates that partition coefficient values estimated from environmental samples can be used as an alternative to those obtained from controlled laboratory experiments in which vegetation is exposed to a constant HTO concentration, a recommended method of obtaining reliable estimates of partition coefficient values.

### 4.2. Key findings

Based on the measured tritium concentrations in pine needles and the results of the analysis reported above, the variability of TFWT and NE-OBT can be explained as follows. Foliar absorption of HTO vapor by pine needles is the primary pathway for tritium entry into the needles while root uptake of HTO is less important. This is evident from the fact that the relative contribution of the foliar absorption to TFWT concentration is estimated to be about 90% by using Eq. (1). This is due to the relatively high relative humidity (approximately 70%) and the higher concentration of HTO in the atmosphere than in soil water at the sampling sites. Higher humidity reduces transpiration from pine needle stomata and slows the movement of water from the roots to the needles through the xylem (McFarlane, 1976; Diabate and Strack, 1993). The dilution of TFWT concentrations in needles due to root uptake of lower concentrations of HTO in soil water is suppressed. As a result, enhanced TFWT concentrations in needles are likely to remain when foliar absorption of higher concentrations of HTO vapor occurs. Under these conditions, where TFWT concentrations were increased by the atmospheric contribution because tissue-free water was used as a photosynthetic substrate, the photosynthetic product NE-OBT would have increased toward a level dependent on the TFWT concentration in the needles (McFarlane et al., 1979). NE-OBT formed by photosynthesis during the vegetative period is used primarily for needle, stem, and root growth. Therefore, part of NE-OBT formed accumulates in the needles and its concentration is considered to be the integral of the NE-OBT concentration during the vegetative period.

The present results indicate that i) the time-averaged TFWT concentration over the growing season can be regarded as the integral of a large number of TFWT quasi-equilibrium concentrations and atmospheric HTO vapor concentrations over time scales of minutes to hours, and ii) the NE-OBT concentration in pine needles can be regarded as proportional to the time-averaged TFWT concentration over the growing season. This implies that NE-OBT production in pine needles is nearly linear throughout the growing season, and that once produced, a substantial portion of the NE-OBT remains in the structures of the pine needles. As the result of the relatively high isotope discrimination factor obtained, it can be further hypothesized that NE-OBT in pine needles is continuously exchanged with tritium and hydrogen in tissue-free water. This hypothesis is supported by a previous study on the hydrogen isotopic composition of plant cellulose, which showed that approximately 40% of the carbon-bound hydrogen in cellulose undergoes isotopic exchange with hydrogen in tree sap water during enzyme-mediated biosynthesis (Roden et al., 2000). This post-photosynthetic process may result in an apparent reduction in tritium fractionation from the level found during photosynthesis.

For the ratio of NE-OBT to TFWT, we propose a ratio of 0.67 for pine needles in Japan, based on time-averaged TFWT concentrations. By taking into account the uncertainty in the estimated NE-OBT concentration values, the NE-OBT/TFWT ratio may vary by a factor of up to 1.5, indicating that the ratio is still less than unity. From a radioecological point of view, it should be noted that there was no bioaccumulation of TFWT or NE-OBT in the pine needles.

Another implication of this study from an ecohydrological perspective is that the use of tritium is effective in quantifying the physiological and hydrological processes in pine needles and trees as a bioindicator. One of the reasons for this advantage of the use of tritium is to investigate the spatiotemporal dynamics of water movement in the soil-plant-atmosphere continuum, especially around emission sources. In this study, large variations in TFWT and NE-OBT concentrations were observed within 5 km of the FDNPP in response to the arrival of the plume. This characteristic would have facilitated the identification of the relative contributions of foliar water and root water uptake on the tissue free water and the isotopic fractionation in pine needles. Moreover, water vapor uptake by leaves may be important as a significant net water source for terrestrial plants, especially in foggy weather (Kagawa, 2022). Our findings are primarily the result of the recent improvement in the accuracy of the NE-OBT analysis used in this study. At present, however, OBT measurement remains a complicated, expensive and time-consuming process (Kim et al., 2013), resulting in lack of knowledge of NE-OBT dynamics in the environment. The combined use of stable hydrogen isotopes would provide an opportunity to better understand the dynamics of water movement and assimilation in the soil-plant-atmosphere continuum (Orlowski et al., 2023).

### 4.3. Strengths and limitations

In this study, we successfully measured tritium concentrations in pine needles in the vicinity of FDNPP and quantitatively analyzed their relationship with tritium concentrations in atmospheric vapor using a simple static model. The model results provided a rationale for the use of time-averaged atmospheric HTO vapor concentrations for estimating NE-OBT concentrations as well as representative values of TFWT concentrations during the growing season. However, we recommend exercising caution in applying these results to other studies. First, the present results are applicable to situations where atmospheric HTO concentrations are relatively high. This is not the case for the plants irrigated with water containing high concentrations of HTO. Ota et al. (2017) suggested that in the quasi-equilibrium state using irrigation water containing a high concentration of HTO, the concentration of OBT remained elevated and unchanged despite the arrival of atmospheric plumes. Second, we did not consider the pathway of tritiated hydrogen (HT) oxidation at the soil surface, which is one of the sources of HTO in soil water. HT oxidation contributes significantly to atmospheric HTO (Kim et al., 2012), so studies on HT oxidation and monitoring of HT oxidation values are needed to assess the environmental impact of future fusion reactors. In the future, it could be interesting to investigate the applicability of the method employed in the present study to the above two cases.

## 5. Conclusion

We measured TFWT and NE-OBT concentrations in pine needles collected in the vicinity of the FDNPP and analyzed the relationship between these concentrations and atmospheric HTO vapor concentrations. Concentrations of TFWT and NE-OBT that varied with sampling time and location were correlated with time-averaged atmospheric HTO vapor concentrations. The validity of using time-averaged atmospheric HTO vapor concentrations to assess HTO transport within the soil-plant-atmosphere continuum was evaluated using a simple static model. TFWT concentrations at the time of sampling were found to vary momentarily by an order of magnitude from the time-averaged concentrations during the growing season. We also noted the absence of any bioaccumulation of TFWT and NE-OBT in pine needles even in cases where the plants grow under conditions of chronically high atmospheric HTO vapor concentrations.

From the perspective of environmental tritium monitoring in the vicinity of atmospheric sources, it is important to measure NE-OBT concentrations in vegetation using information on time-averaged atmospheric HTO vapor concentrations at the sampling sites. TFWT concentrations can be used to access the range of variability in atmospheric HTO vapor concentrations. By using the approach employed in this study, we can assess the variability of TFWT and NE-OBT concentrations in vegetation from environmental monitoring and verify its potential as a bioindicator. The present study is a basic research project with results that can be applied to the water cycle through plants. We expect research on environmental tritium to have a ripple effect on the field of hydrogen dynamics in plants.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement

**Shigekazu Hirao:** Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Investigation, Resources, Data curation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing. **Hideki Kakiuchi:** Investigation, Resources, Writing - review & editing. **Naofumi Akata:** Conceptualization, Writing - review & editing. **Toshiya Tamari:** Investigation, Resources, Data curation, Writing - review & editing. **Shinji Sugihara:** Investigation, Resources, Writing - review & editing. **Nagayoshi Shima:** Investigation, Resources, Data curation, Writing - review & editing. **Masahiro Tanaka:** Conceptualization, Writing - review & editing.

## Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Data availability

Data will be made available on request.

## Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank the staff of Okuma Town Office for their support of our sampling work and for permitting access to sampling locations. We also wish to thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive reviews and suggestions.

## Funding sources

This work was partly supported by the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research (KAKENHI) [grant numbers 21H03607 and 22K12399]; the NIFS Collaboration Research Programs [grant numbers NIFS18KOCA003 and NIFS21KOCA005]; the Takahashi Industrial and Economic Research Foundation; and Fukushima University.

## References

[List of references as in original text...]