# Organically Bound Deuterium in Rice and Soybean After Exposure to Heavy Water Vapor as a Substitute for Tritiated Water

**Authors**: Michiko Ichimasa, Caiyun Weng, Tetsuki Ara, Yusuke Ichimasa

**Published in**: Fusion Science and Technology, Volume 41, Number 3P2, pp. 393-398 (2002)

**DOI**: [10.13182/FST02-A22618](https://doi.org/10.13182/FST02-A22618)

---

## Author Affiliations

- **Michiko Ichimasa, Caiyun Weng, Tetsuki Ara, Yusuke Ichimasa**: Department of Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Science, Ibaraki University, 2-1-1 Bunkyo, Mito, Ibaraki, 310-8512, Japan

---

## ABSTRACT

Heavy water vapor release experiments were carried out in a greenhouse using deuterium as a substitute for tritium and uptake and loss kinetics of D₂O in leaves and formation, translocation and retention of organically bound deuterium (OBD) in rice and soybean were investigated. Rate constants of D₂O uptake in leaves of rice plant and soybean in the daytime release were 2.4 and 3.0 h⁻¹, respectively, and 5-4 times higher than those in the nighttime release. Rate constants of D₂O loss in leaves after daytime release were about twice those after the nighttime release. The half time of D₂O loss was 0.6-0.7 h for leaves of rice plant and soybean. After D₂O release, OBD concentration in unhulled rice and soybean increased with time until 4-5 days of the experiments and then decreased with time and the extent of decrease was remarkable in soybean pea.

---

## I. INTRODUCTION

A great amount of tritium gas will be used in the future nuclear fusion reactors as fuel for DT reaction. Tritium is released in the environment during normal operation or by an accident. Among the chemical forms of tritium released in the environment, tritium gas is less toxic than tritiated water (HTO), but it can be oxidized to HTO by microorganisms in the soil and HTO has a very high contribution to the dose. Especially as for tritium taken into human body via food chain, the dose due to organically bound tritium (OBT) is 2.3 times higher than that due to HTO (ICRP 1995). Studies on OBT formation and translocation to the edible parts of main crops such as wheat and rice in the local environment are limited and required for dose assessment purpose before the start of the operation of a nuclear fusion reactor. However it is difficult to do tritium release field experiments in Japan due to public acceptance problem. Thus heavy water D₂O vapor release experiments in a greenhouse were carried out in the Mito campus of Ibaraki University using D₂O as a substitute for HTO. In this study, uptake and loss kinetics of D₂O in leaves and formation, translocation and retention of organically bound deuterium (OBD) in rice and soybean were reported.

---

## II. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS

Two greenhouses, a long rectangular parallelepiped $(1.8 \mathrm{m} \times 1.8 \mathrm{m} \times 7.2 \mathrm{m})$ covered with vinyl sheets, were put on a campus field, one for daytime release and the other for nighttime release. Heavy water D₂O vapor generated by an ultrasonic humidity supplier containing 20% D₂O was introduced with dry air containing 4500 ppm of ¹³CO₂ into a greenhouse for 8 hours. Daytime release was conducted from 8:45 to 16:45 on 21 and nighttime release was from 20:00 on 22 to 4:00 on 23 in August 1999. The CO₂ concentration in the greenhouse did not increase due to ¹³CO₂ addition and the behavior of ¹³C was not analyzed yet in this study. The temperature in the greenhouse was controlled by air conditioner and a shade on the roof. Table 1 shows the temperature and relative humidity at the sampling point of each plant in the greenhouse.

**Table 1. Temperature and relative humidity during D₂O release**

| Sampling point | Temperature (°C) | Relative humidity (%) |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Daytime F | $31.1 \pm 1.9$ | $63.8 \pm 7.2$ |
| Daytime G | $31.0 \pm 2.0$ | $64.1 \pm 7.2$ |
| Daytime J | $31.1 \pm 2.4$ | $66.5 \pm 6.3$ |
| Daytime K | $31.0 \pm 2.4$ | $66.7 \pm 6.7$ |
| Nighttime F | $22.8 \pm 1.6$ | $80.9 \pm 6.4$ |
| Nighttime G | $21.7 \pm 1.7$ | $83.1 \pm 5.1$ |
| Nighttime J | $21.5 \pm 1.6$ | $85.7 \pm 5.0$ |
| Nighttime K | $21.5 \pm 1.5$ | $86.2 \pm 4.6$ |

*Sampling point of temperature, relative humidity and air moisture. F for rice plant (flooding pot), J for rice plant (nonflooding pot), G and K for soybean.

Rice plants used were a middle-ripening variety named "Yumehitachi" transplanted on May 7 in a flooding pot and grown outdoors until use. Harvesting time of rice was September 14. An early-ripening variety of soybean was seeded in greenhouse grounds on June 6 and harvested on October 23. Two pots of rice plants were flooded like a flooding paddy field (water depth, 5 cm) and the other two were not flooded during and after each release experiment. Sampling of vegetation, pot water, soil and air moisture during D₂O release was conducted through a nearby sampling hole with closing cover on the side walls of the greenhouses. After exposure, plastic coverings of the greenhouse were removed, and deuterium behavior in plant samples was continuously investigated until harvest.

Soil water and tissue free water of plants were collected by using a microwave oven. For determination of organically bound deuterium (OBD), non-exchangeable OBD, plant samples were dried for 48 hr in an oven at 60°C and followed by two times repetition of drying up after bathing with 20 volumes of water. The dried samples were burned under high oxygen pressure in a chamber and the combustion water was collected using a cold trap.

D₂O concentration in a sample was determined by gas-liquid chromatography equipped TCD. The D₂O uptake kinetic parameter of each plant was calculated by fitting plant sample data to a kinetic model by Belot et al: $C_p = C_{\text{max}}(1 - e^{-kt})$, where $C_p$ is D₂O concentration in a plant sample at time $t$, $C_{\text{max}}$ is the steady state concentration and $k$ is the rate constant. In this study, we modified the equation as $C_{Rp} = C_{R\text{max}}(1 - e^{-kt})$ using D₂O concentration ratio instead of D₂O concentration, i.e. $C_{Rp}$ is D₂O concentration in free water of a plant sample $(C_p)$ / D₂O concentration in air moisture $C_a$ around sampling plant at time $t$, and then $C_{R\text{max}}$ is the steady state concentration ratio, and calculated $k$ and $C_{R\text{max}}$ by a computerized non-linear least square method (NLIN procedure of statistical analyst systems: SAS). The rate constant of D₂O loss in plant was calculated by an equation: $C_p = C_0 e^{-kt}$, where $C_p$ is D₂O concentration in free water of a plant sample at the elapsed time ($t$) after the end of release, $C_0$ is D₂O concentration in air moisture at time $t = 0$. Translocation index (TLIₐ) was calculated as follows: TLIₐ = OBD in hulled rice or soybean pea (ppm) / mean D₂O concentration in air moisture at steady state (ppm). For comparison, D₂O concentration in air moisture at the steady state during the daytime and nighttime releases was normalized to 20000 ppm, respectively.

---

## III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

There are many modeling studies of tritium behavior in the environment. Dynamic models have been developed for time-dependent dose prediction in an accidental release of tritium, while specific activity models are generally used for dose assessment purpose for atmospheric chronic release of tritium. In specific activity models, the ratio of the specific activity of HTO in vegetation to that of HTO in atmospheric moisture recommended in NRC model (1977) is 0.5, while 1.0 is used in TERFOC-N model in Japan. The ratio varies in a wide range under various seasonal and climatic conditions, which affect on physiological properties of vegetation.

D₂O concentration in air moisture in the greenhouse rapidly increased and reached almost a constant level during the release (Fig. 1). Figure 2 shows normalized D₂O concentration in tissue free water of plant samples (TFWD) and soil water during and after the releases. D₂O concentration in soil water at the end of the release was only 2-4% that in air moisture either in the daytime release or in the nighttime release. Figure 3 shows the specific concentration ratio $C_p / C_a$ (D₂O concentration in free water of a plant sample $(C_p)$ / D₂O concentration in air moisture $C_a$). The ratios at almost equilibrium in the daytime release were 0.53 and 0.59 for leaves of rice and soybean, respectively. In the nighttime release, the ratios for leaves of rice were almost the same as those in the daytime experiment. The rate constant of the transfer of D₂O to vegetation was obtained according to the above equation $C_{Rp} = C_{R\text{max}}(1 - e^{-kt})$ (Table 2). Rate constants of D₂O uptake in leaves of rice plant in non-flooding pot, rice in flooding pot, soybean in the daytime release were as high as 2.4, 2.3 and 3.0 h⁻¹ and 5-4 times higher than those in the nighttime release. The calculated steady state concentration ratios $(C_{R\text{max}})$ of plant leaves in both releases were almost the same as observed data.

**Table 2. Rate constant (k) and steady state concentration ratio ($C_{R\text{max}}$) of D₂O uptake from air to vegetation**

| | Daytime release | | Nighttime release | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| | $k$ (h⁻¹) | $C_{R\text{max}}$ | $k$ (h⁻¹) | $C_{R\text{max}}$ |
| Rice plant leaf | $2.384 \pm 0.965$ | $0.541 \pm 0.022$ | $0.429 \pm 0.039$ | $0.562 \pm 0.018$ |
| Unhulled rice | $0.636 \pm 0.124$ | $0.217 \pm 0.010$ | $0.055 \pm 0.114$ | $0.750 \pm 1.283$ |
| Rice plant leaf (flooding) | $2.269 \pm 0.760$ | $0.440 \pm 0.016$ | $0.551 \pm 0.067$ | $0.544 \pm 0.020$ |
| Unhulled rice (flooding) | $0.378 \pm 0.072$ | $0.216 \pm 0.014$ | $0.355 \pm 0.059$ | $0.247 \pm 0.018$ |
| Soybean leaf | $2.951 \pm 1.668$ | $0.562 \pm 0.022$ | $0.671 \pm 0.319$ | $0.428 \pm 0.057$ |
| Soybean pea | $0.230 \pm 0.375$ | $0.273 \pm 0.224$ | $0.071 \pm 0.002$ | $0.210 \pm 0.004$ |
| Soybean hull | $0.069 \pm 0.083$ | $0.534 \pm 0.510$ | $0.046 \pm 0.002$ | $0.307 \pm 0.012$ |

$C_{pp} = C_{\text{max}}(1 - e^{-kt})$

Table 3 shows the rate constant and half time of D₂O loss in free water in leaves of rice and soybean and unhulled rice. The loss rate constants in the daytime release were about twice of those in the nighttime release. The half time of D₂O loss was 0.6-0.7 h for leaves of rice plant and soybean, and 1.5-1.8 h for unhulled rice (non-flooding pot - flooding pot). The rate constant and half time of D₂O loss in leaves of rice plant in a non-flooding pot in the daytime release agreed well with those of HTO loss in grass leaves exposed under light conditions by Kline and Stewart.

**Table 3. Rate constant (k) and half time ($t_{1/2}$) of TFWD loss from vegetation**

| | Daytime release | | Nighttime release | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| | $k$ (h⁻¹) | $t_{1/2}$ (h) | $k$ (h⁻¹) | $t_{1/2}$ (h) |
| Rice plant leaf | $1.155 \pm 0.204$ | 0.6 | $0.514 \pm 0.042$ | 1.3 |
| Unhulled rice | $0.452 \pm 0.087$ | 1.5 | $0.214 \pm 0.039$ | 3.2 |
| Rice plant leaf (flooding) | $1.041 \pm 0.212$ | 0.7 | $0.582 \pm 0.061$ | 1.2 |
| Unhulled rice (flooding) | $0.388 \pm 0.087$ | 1.8 | $0.202 \pm 0.033$ | 3.4 |
| Soybean leaf | $1.058 \pm 0.155$ | 0.7 | $0.547 \pm 0.117$ | 1.3 |

* $C_p = C_0 e^{-kt}$  
* $e^{-kt_{1/2}} = 1/2$

As for tritium taken into human body via food chain, the dose due to organically bound tritium (OBT) is several times higher than that due to HTO. Studies on OBT formation and translocation to the edible parts of vegetation and retention of OBT are required. Figure 4 (A) shows the total OBD distribution in various parts of rice plant in a pot just after the daytime and nighttime release of D₂O. OBD formation during the nighttime is primarily due to light-independent metabolic reactions. Total OBD formation during daytime D₂O release was about 10 times that during nighttime exposure. No detectable OBD was found in roots. Almost the same results were observed in the case of rice plant in a flooding pot except no detectable OBD in daytime stem (Fig. (4B)). Figure 5 shows fresh weight and water content of hulled rice and soybean pea to see the growth stage of both plants. Both grains were exposed to D₂O at the early stage of grain growth. Figure 6 shows the changes of organic matter content and average OBD concentration in a grain of unhulled rice grown in a non-flooding and flooding pot during and after the daytime and nighttime release until harvest. Organic matter content in grain increased with time and unhulled rice grains were harvested at 24 or 25 days of the release experiments. After the release, OBD concentration in grain exposed to D₂O in the daytime release increased with time until 4-5 days of the experiments and then decreased with time. The increase of OBD in unhulled rice grain ($\mu$g OBD / grain of unhulled rice) after the release in the daytime experiment was primarily due to translocation of OBD in stems and leaves since that in the nighttime experiment was much lower than that in the daytime experiment. Half times of D₂O loss in leaves of rice plant were 0.6 and 0.7 h in a non-flooding pot and a flooding pot and then detectable amount of OBD formation by photosynthesis in leaves after release would not be expected. The decrease of OBD content in grain of unhulled rice during rice grain growth was observed, which indicated the metabolic consumption of OBD in the grain. The apparent abrupt decrease of OBD concentration ($\mu$g OBD/g organic matter) on and after several days of the daytime experiment included both the dilution of OBD with newly synthesized organic matter and the metabolic consumption of OBD. Diabate and Strack reported that OBT in ear and in particular in grains decreased only slightly until harvest time in the case of spring wheat after exposure to atmospheric HTO. In case of soybean pea, as shown in Fig. 6 & 7, the increase of OBD concentration (ppm) in pea was observed until 4 days of the experiments and then most of OBD decreased until harvest. The rate constant (k) and half time of loss of OBD concentration in soybean pea was calculated by an equation: $C_p = C_0 e^{kt}$; $k$ and $t_{1/2}$ for daytime release was $0.0099 \pm 0.0022$, 70 h and for nighttime release $0.0034 \pm 0.0016$ and 204 h respectively. Figure 8 shows the changes of TFWD/OBD concentration ratio of unhulled rice and soybean pea. TFWD was not detected in rice grain and pea at harvest. As shown in Table 4, OBD concentration in unhulled rice and hulled rice obtained in daytime release experiment at harvest was 1.2 and 1.3 times that in nighttime release and OBD in hulled rice was about 1.7 times that in unhulled rice. TLIₐ in hulled rice was 0.38-0.32 for the daytime release and 0.28-0.27 for the nighttime release. While TLIₐ in soybean pea in both the daytime and nighttime release experiment was very low and 0.08 (Table 5).

**Table 4. OBD in unhulled rice and hulled rice at harvest and TLIₐ (1999)**

| | Mean D₂O concentration in air moisture at steady state (ppm) | OBD at harvest (ppm) | | TLIₐ (%) | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| | | Unhulled rice | Hulled rice | Unhulled rice | Hulled rice |
| Daytime release non-flooding | 5177 (20000) | $12 \pm 0 (46)$ | $20 \pm 1.4 (77)$ | 0.23 | 0.39 |
| Daytime release flooding | 5613 (20000) | $11 \pm 2.1 (39)$ | $18 \pm 1.4 (64)$ | 0.20 | 0.32 |
| Nighttime release non-flooding | 13101 (20000) | $23 \pm 0.7 (35)$ | $37 \pm 0.7 (56)$ | 0.18 | 0.28 |
| Nighttime release flooding | 14383 (20000) | $28 \pm 1.4 (39)$ | $39 \pm 1.4 (54)$ | 0.19 | 0.27 |

( ): normalized to 20000 ppm of D₂O concentration in air moisture.

**Table 5. OBD in soybean pea at harvest and TLIₐ (1999)**

| | Mean D₂O concentration in air moisture at steady state (ppm) | OBD in soybean pea at harvest (ppm) | TLIₐ (%) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Daytime release | 5252 (20000) | $4.2 \pm 10.8 (16)$ | 0.08 |
| Nighttime release | 13571 (20000) | $10.6 \pm 4.3 (16)$ | 0.08 |

( ): normalized to 20000 ppm of D₂O concentration in air moisture.

---

## IV. CONCLUSION

D₂O vapor release experiments in a greenhouse were carried out in the Mito campus of Ibaraki University using D₂O as a substitute for HTO to determine the uptake and loss kinetics of D₂O in leaves and formation, translocation and retention of OBD. Two greenhouses were put on the field, one for daytime release (8:45-16:45, Aug. 21) and the other for nighttime release (20:00-4:00, Aug. 22-23). D₂O vapor was introduced into a greenhouse for 8 hours. The temperature in a greenhouse was controlled. Rice plants grown in flooded pots and soybean grown in the greenhouses were used. In order to compare the effect of D₂O deposition in the water surface and soil surface, two pots of rice plants were flooded and the other two pots were not flooded in each release experiment. Rate constants (h⁻¹) of D₂O uptake in leaves of rice plant and soybean in the daytime release were 2-3 and 4-5 times higher than those in the nighttime release, respectively. Rate constants of D₂O loss in leaves of rice and soybean in the daytime release were about twice those in the nighttime release. OBD content in a rice grain increased until 4-5 days after the release and then decreased with time to 1/2-1/3 at 24-25 days (at harvest). These results indicate metabolic consumption of OBD in rice grain during growth. The similar results were obtained in soybean pea OBD.

---

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This study was partially supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research from the Ministry of Education, Science and Culture, Japan.

---

## REFERENCES

1. ICRP, ICRP Publication 72, Pergamon Press, Oxford (1995).
2. W. Raskob and P.J. Barry, "Importance and Variability in Processes Relevant to Environmental Tritium Dose assessment Model", J. Environ. Radioactivity, 36, 237 (1997).
3. S. Diabate and S. Strack, "Organically Bound Tritium in Wheat after Short-Term Exposure to Atmospheric Tritium under Laboratory Conditions", J. Environ. Radioactivity, 36, 157 (1997)
4. Y.H. Choi, K.M. Lim, W.Y. Lee, S. Diabate and S. Strack, "Tissue free water tritium and organically bound tritium in the rice plant acutely exposed to atmospheric HTO vapor under semi-outdoor conditions", J. Environ. Radioactivity, 58, 67 (2002).
5. M. Atarashi-Andoh, H. Amano, H. Kakiuchi, M. Ichimasa and Y. Ichimasa, "Formation and Retention of Organically Bound Deuterium in Rice in Deuterium Water Release Experiment", Health Phys., 82, 863 (2002).
6. Morishita, T. and Noda, S., "Measurement and tracer technique for heavy water by use of gas chromatography", Radioisotopes, 31, 619 (1982).
7. Belot, Y., Gauthier, D., Camus, H., Caput, C., "Prediction of the flux of tritiated water from air to plant leaves", Health Phys., 37, 575 (1979).
8. W. Raskob, UFOTRI: Description of the New Version of the Tritium Model UFOTRI 4.0, including user guide. Report KfK-5194, Kernforschungszentrum Karlsruhe (1993).
9. U.S. Nuclear Regulation Commission, Regulatory guide 1, 109 (1977).
10. Togawa, O., J. Nuc. Sci. Technol., 27, 360 (1990).
11. Kline, J.R. and Stewart, M.L., "Tritium uptake and loss in grass vegetation which has been exposed to an atmospheric source of tritiated water", Health Phys., 26, 567 (1974).