# Tritium in Plants¹

JAMES C. McFARLANE, WERNER F. BECKERT, AND KENNETH W. BROWN

*Journal of Environmental Quality* (Reviews and Analyses)

## ABSTRACT

This is a review of literature regarding the fate and consequence of tritium in plants. Concepts and terminologies commonly used in plant-water relations are generally adequate to describe tritium kinetics in plants. Isotopic fractionation between tritium and stable hydrogen occurs in many plant-mediated processes and may result in about a 20% depletion in plant organics. Possible errors in tritium studies result from hydrogen exchange and fractionation during sample collection, storage, preparation, and analysis. Potential pitfalls encountered in laboratory and field studies are pointed out and illustrated. Original research data are used to illustrate specific processes.

*Additional Index Words:* isotopic fractionation, hydrogen, plant physiology, radioactive isotopes, pollutant pathways.

---

The release and fate of radioactive elements in the environment resulting from nuclear weapons testing and activities associated with the nuclear power industry are major public concerns. Tritium, the only radioactive isotope of hydrogen, constitutes a significant portion of the residual radioactivity being released during these activities. Tritium is also a naturally occurring radionuclide which originates in the atmosphere from the action of certain components of the cosmic ray flux on the nuclei of nitrogen and oxygen in air; however, this results in a natural equilibrium concentration of only 16 to 35 picocuries per liter (pCi/liter) in the hydrosphere. Weaver et al. (1969) attributed about 4% of the total estimated world tritium burden of 1.7 × 10⁹ curies to the natural equilibrium level; the remainder was primarily ascribed to the atmospheric testing of nuclear weapons. Since tritium decays with a half-life of 12.35 years, most of the large quantities of tritium produced prior to the 1963 test ban treaty have already decayed. Except for tests by nations not adhering to the treaty, the primary source of tritium is now the nuclear power industry.

Tritium is released to the environment primarily as tritiated water (HTO) and molecular tritium (HT, or T₂). Once released, tritiated water is rapidly diluted by the large volumes of water in streams, rivers, and oceans, and, when released via stacks, by dispersion in air. It has been assumed that when elemental tritium is released it is diluted by the whole atmosphere. However, there remains some uncertainty as to its eventual fate in the atmosphere and to the relative significance of its contribution to environmental tritium pollution. The large dilution capacities of the hydrosphere and atmosphere reduce the current average tritium concentration to very low levels. Nevertheless, tritium can be a problem on a local level.

All life depends on energy-rich hydrocarbons produced by photosynthesis. Understanding plant contamination with tritium is, therefore, an important step in understanding the food chain fate and transport of this radionuclide. When an area is subjected to tritium contamination for either a short or long time, plants will incorporate tritium. If these plants become food for animals or man, tritium can end up as part of human tissue (most critically DNA). Knowing the fate of tritium in plants is therefore obviously important.

Considerable research on the impact of environmental tritium on man's existence has been reported and various aspects have been reviewed. Outstanding publications include a review by Jacobs (1968) on the physical and chemical aspects; another by Elwood (1971) which extensively covers the pathways and rates of tritium movement, the forms of incorporation, and biotic turnover; and a collection of papers edited by Moghissi and Carter (1973) as proceedings of a symposium in which an effort was made to evaluate all important aspects of tritium.

This treatise focuses on those aspects of tritium that are specifically important to understand its role and behavior in the plant-soil-water system. It is a review of pertinent literature supplemented with results of original research where a particular point could be explained more clearly by examples and where new data were required to demonstrate a concept.

## CHEMISTRY AND PHYSICS OF TRITIUM AND TRITIATED WATER

The three hydrogen isotopes, protium (P), deuterium (D), and tritium (T), have atomic weights of 1, 2, and 3, respectively. Each has one proton and one electron, and thus all have similar chemical properties, but the free energies of the isotopes and the corresponding reaction rates decrease with increasing mass.

Tritium emits a beta particle in the process of its decay to helium. All biological or physical differences between tritium and protium are based on either the mass difference, the effect of beta emission, or the different chemical properties of the tritium decay product. Deuterium, on the other hand, is nonradioactive and differs from protium only in mass. Deuterium studies have therefore been useful in interpreting the results of experiments with tritium, and have allowed differentiation between mass and radiation effects.

Eisenberg and Kauzmann (1969) reported the bond angles and lengths for D₂O, H₂O, and HDO as being very near equal and pointed out that this was consistent with the Born-Oppenheimer approximation, which predicts that the electronic structures of molecules are independent of the masses of their nuclei. Since electronic and spatial characteristics largely determine the chemical properties of an atom or molecule, all reactions involving hydrogen should be similar to those involving deuterium or tritium. Alternately, reaction rates are governed by molecular free energies; thus slower reactions occur with the heavier isotopes.

The properties of water which reflect average free energies of solutions are termed colligative properties. These include boiling and freezing temperatures and vapor and osmotic pressures. The forces that cause hydration of solutes and structural materials restrict the free movement of some water molecules and, as a consequence, the average free energy of water in a system is reduced. Also, because of increased mass, the free energy of heavy water molecules (HTO and HDO) is lower than that of light water molecules (H₂O). Consequently, the addition of deuterium or tritium oxide to water results in an average free energy decrease of the solution which is proportional to the concentration of the heavy water molecules (Jones, 1968; Jacobs, 1968).

The evaporation rate of water from a solution is proportional to the average free energy of the water molecules in the liquid phase. Since heavy water molecules have a lower free energy than light water molecules, their addition to water lowers the overall evaporation rate of the mixture. Yet it should be noted that under environmental or typical experimental conditions, the HTO concentration is so low that its influence on the evaporation rate and on all other colligative properties of the solution can be neglected. This is not always the case in deuterium studies, and failure to consider changes in water potential may result in a misinterpretation of experimental results.

On a molecular basis, light water molecules in a mixture are more likely to evaporate because of their higher molecular free energy. Consequently, a continuous enrichment of the heavier water molecules in the liquid phase takes place. This isotopic fractionation can be described by the fractionation ratio (FR), which is defined as

\[
\text{FR} = C_1 / C_2
\]

where \(C_1\) = concentration of heavy isotope in the primary fraction (i.e., tritium concentration in the liquid phase), and \(C_2\) = concentration of heavy isotope in the secondary fraction (i.e., tritium concentration in the vapor phase). It is emphasized that the fractionation ratio describes the degree of fractionation and is independent of the original solute concentration (e.g., HTO), whereas the overall rate of evaporation is directly dependent on the concentration of the heavy isotope.

Moghissi et al. (1973a) pointed out that temperature changes affect the vapor pressures of T₂O, D₂O, and H₂O to a different degree. Both ratios decrease with increasing temperature. Corresponding decreases occur in the fractionation ratios with increasing temperatures. Similarly affected by temperature is the water potential of heavy water. The calculated water potentials of pure D₂O at various temperatures are shown in Table 1. Since the water potential of pure free H₂O at a given temperature is defined as zero, the difference between H₂O and D₂O potentials decreases with increasing temperature.

**Table 1—Water potential of D₂O at various temperatures.**

| Temperature, °C | 10 | 20 | 30 | 40 | 50 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Water potential in bars† | -196 | -183 | -168 | -153 | -139 |

† Water potential calculated from the relationship \(\Psi_w = RT \ln(e/e_0)/\overline{V}_w\), where \(R = 0.083143\) liter-bar deg⁻¹ mole⁻¹, \(T = \text{°K}\), \(e =\) vapor pressure, \(e_0 =\) vapor pressure of pure free water at \(T\), \(\overline{V} =\) partial molal volume.

## Routes of Tritium Entry into Plants

Water enters plants primarily through the roots. Plant exposure to tritium therefore depends mainly on the concentration and distribution of HTO in the soil. Tritiated water applied to a soil surface moves downward as a pulse. Originally there is a sharp boundary between contaminated and uncontaminated layers but it is increasingly blurred by exchange of tritiated water with soil water. Even in dry soils exchange of hydrogen for tritium occurs on various surfaces and results in a concentration gradient at the forward edge. New water added to the soil surface moves the old water downward creating a contaminated water lens (Fig. 1). The rate and extent of downward movement depend mainly on the structure, texture, and water content of the soil. Water removal from soil via plant root absorption is of great importance in most terrestrial ecosystems. Plants with a shallow root system, such as many vegetables and cereals, absorb water primarily from the upper few decimeters of the soil, whereas plants with tap roots may absorb water from depths of 10 to 15 m. Thus, movement of a water lens to 1 m below the surface may make this body of water unavailable to some species, but optimize absorption for others. Rooting patterns are also influenced by plant age, vigor, soil type, climate, and by the number and kinds of plants competing for light, water, and nutrients. This makes it difficult to predict the importance of transpiration to the fate of a pulse of tritiated water, and each situation must be evaluated individually. The residence time of water in plants is generally short compared to its residence in soil, notable exceptions being certain desert plants (e.g., cacti). This is a result of the large water-holding capacity of soil combined with the large soil mass. Thus, the residence time of tritium in soil largely determines the exposure time and, consequently, the effect on the rest of the ecological system.

*[Fig. 1—Downward movement of HTO in soil. Dilution of HTO at the wetting front (● — ●) of an oven-dried soil is caused by exchange of tritium with protium in colloidal water and exchangeable protium on the soil particles. At the beginning the tritiated water loses its rather narrow (□ — □). Diffusion causes this lens to become wider with time.]*

Under some conditions, foliar absorption of tritium may become important, especially in areas with high atmospheric levels of HTO or HT. Water vapor movement through open stomata is controlled by the same factors that control the inward movement of any gas, i.e., stomatal density and aperture as well as temperature and boundary layer conditions. Once inside the stomatal cavity, water vapor is absorbed into the layer of liquid water on the cavity linings and, unlike other gases, becomes part of the solvent system rather than a solute. It is then subject to transpiration at the rate determined by the factors controlling overall plant transpiration. When transpiration is slow, residence of tritiated water at the evaporative surface is longer, thus allowing diffusion away from that surface and transport to other portions of the plant. Foliar accumulation of tritiated water has been demonstrated by Vaadia and Waisel (1963) for nontranspiring plants where accumulation is much faster than in transpiring plants (Koranda and Martin, 1973; Cline, 1953; Aronoff and Choi, 1963; Kline and Stewart, 1974).

As a demonstration of the previous concepts, we conducted experiments designed to show the relative importance of foliar absorption of tritiated water vapor. Alfalfa plants were grown in hydroponic solution, and a vapor-tight seal was made between the aerial portions of the plants and the roots. The plants were then placed in a growth chamber in which the HTO vapor concentration was maintained at 110 nCi mL⁻¹. Other environmental parameters were kept constant throughout the test. The graph in Fig. 2 shows the concentration of tritium in the nutrient culture solution. The slope over the first 80 hours indicates the rate of absorption and translocation of tritiated water through the plant and net deposition into the rooting solution. After 80 hours of continuous light, the lights were shut off and the transpiration rate decreased from 4 × 10⁻³ to about 0.4 × 10⁻³ mL min⁻¹ per gram dry wt. In the dark, even though stomatal aperture was much smaller, as indicated by decreased transpiration rate, the rate of basipetal movement of tritiated water was increased from 0.8 to 2.4 mL day⁻¹ (determined from the concentration change and volume of hydroponic solution). After 24 hours of dark, the tritiated water was extracted from the roots and leaves of these plants and was found to contain 521 and 39,431 pCi mL⁻¹, respectively. Thus, when water movement in a plant is predominantly determined by diffusion rather than mass flow, the aerial and rooting portions of such a plant tend to equilibrate with the water available as water vapor in the air or in contact with the roots. It is evident from these data that under conditions of relatively high humidity (85%), moderate transpiration, and continuous HTO vapor exposure, plant leaves do accumulate tritium. It is conceivable that, under conditions of high relative humidity and low soil moisture, basipetal movement of tritiated water may be an important factor in the contamination of plants and soils. However, under most agricultural conditions, foliar contamination would not be of primary importance. Since the water turnover rate in a transpiring plant is rapid, the loss of tritiated water from such a plant is also very rapid. Koranda and Martin (1973) showed that the residence half times for tritiated water in woody and herbaceous plants varied between 20 and 70 min, depending on the morphology of the plants and on environmental conditions.

*[Fig. 2—Tritium concentration in the hydroponic solution of alfalfa plants. The tritium moved to the solution via foliar absorption of HTO vapor and transport through the plants.]*

Foliar exposure to tritiated methane (CH₃T) can also result in tritium contamination of plants (Mason et al., 1971, 1973), but this kind of exposure is generally rare and, therefore, relatively unimportant. Plant exposure to elemental tritium (HT) is not uncommon; it results in rapid incorporation of tritium into the free plant water and the organic material (McFarlane, 1978). The route of contamination involves oxidation of elemental tritium by a soil microorganism and subsequent absorption and translocation of the tritiated water into the plant (McFarlane et al., 1978). The importance of this route of contamination in a field situation is unknown; however, the relatively large quantities of HT released during nuclear fuel reprocessing suggest that this contamination route be thoroughly investigated.

Under mass flow conditions (i.e., transpirational water movement through the xylem), HTO moves in plants at the same rate as H₂O. In diffusional flow, (i.e., evaporation or intracellular movement), HTO moves at a slower rate than H₂O due to its larger mass, but these differences are so slight and water movement in plants so dependent on mass flow that diffusional differences are inconsequential and are generally considered unimportant in describing tritium movement in plants. Therefore, the net movement of tritiated water can best be described by systems developed to identify and define water movement (Slatyer, 1967).

More than 99% of the water entering most plants moves from the root through the xylem system to the stems and leaves, where it evaporates via stomatal openings. The residence time for water in plants varies between minutes and days, depending on size, age, morphology, soil water availability, and atmospheric conditions. Even seedlings have a rapid water turnover. Vig and McFarlane (1975) showed that, following imbibition of HTO by soybean seeds, the tritium depletion rate of the seedlings was exponential. After 1 day only 1% of the original tritium concentration remained in the plant and after 5 days < 0.01% was present.

## Isotope Fractionation in Plants

Although the chemical reactivity of the three hydrogen isotopes is qualitatively similar, their mass differences result in reaction-rate differences. Differences in rates result in fractionation. Significant fractionation of hydrogen isotopes in biological systems can occur during phase changes such as the evaporation of water and in certain chemical reactions. Since fractionation occurs during evaporation of H₂O/HTO mixtures, it may seem puzzling that there is no agreement in the data relating to fractionation in plant transpiration (Washburn and Smith, 1934; Zimmerman et al., 1967). It can be rationalized that, if fractionation occurs during transpiration (in the evaporation step), then the concentration of HTO would increase at and near the evaporative surface. This increasing concentration of HTO at the evaporative surface would cause a concomitant increase in the amount of HTO evaporated (which is proportional to the concentration) until a steady state is reached wherein the loss of tritium would be exactly equal to the supply of tritium. Under conditions of rapid water loss, the accumulation of HTO would be restricted to the evaporative surface and very little diffusion of enriched HTO into the surrounding leaf tissue would be expected. As a consequence, the overall enrichment of tritium would be very small. Under slow transpirative conditions, tritiated water enriched at the evaporative surface would be expected to diffuse into surrounding tissue, thus raising the overall tritium concentration in the leaves. Diffusive movement away from the evaporative site and movement in the phloem may result in increased concentrations in the nontranspiring tissues. Consequently, the transpiration rate not only determines the rate of buildup of HTO at the surface, but also the amount of HTO present in the leaves and other organs. This means that fractionation of water may only be evident under certain conditions, i.e., low transpiration. Fractionation is not normally observed because even though evaporation is a diffusive phenomenon (subject to fractionation), the supply of water to the evaporative site is by mass flow (no fractionation) which entails a more rapid velocity of water molecules moving toward the evaporation site than the diffusive movement of HTO molecules moving in the opposite direction.

To test this theory, we grew alfalfa plants in hydroponic solutions containing HTO in closed environmental simulators. Only the humidity in the simulators was altered to vary the rate of transpiration. The plants were exposed to 8 hours of constant humidity before sampling to ensure that equilibrium had been obtained. The leaves were then separated from the stems, the water was extracted from the respective tissues, and the tritium concentrations determined. The results (Table 2) show indeed a significantly higher tritium concentration in the water of the leaves collected under slow transpiration conditions. However, under most experimental or environmental conditions, any fractionation occurring in the process of transpiration would be so small as to make its contribution to biological processes insignificant.

**Table 2—Tritium concentration in free water of alfalfa stems and leaves under conditions of slow and rapid transpiration.**†

| | Slow transpiration (high humidity > 70%) | Rapid transpiration (low humidity < 25%) |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| | nCi/mL | nCi/mL |
| Leaves | 77.2 ± 0.6* | 75.4 ± 0.5 |
| Stems | 75.4 ± 0.5 | 75.8 ± 0.5 |
| Hydroponic solution | 75.0 ± 0.6 | 75.1 ± 0.5 |

\* Significantly different from other means at the 0.05 level based on paired *T* tests, ±95% confidence interval.
† J. C. McFarlane. 1976. Unpublished results.

The thermodynamic basis of discrimination among the hydrogen isotopes in the synthesis of organic molecules was established by Urey and Rittenberg (1933) and expanded by Bigeleisen (1949) and Waterfield et al. (1968). Fractionation of tritium as a result of incorporation into the organic molecules in plants was reviewed by Bruner (1973) and Weston (1973). These reviews list examples of both concentration of and discrimination against tritium. Since tritium is heavier than hydrogen and its reactivity is lower, it is difficult to imagine a condition where it would be incorporated at a faster rate; but in certain reactions such as the elimination of hydrogen from a particular site (e.g., in metabolic processes), the heavier isotopes are transferred at lower rates than hydrogen. As a result, elevated tritium levels could develop in certain fractions. Subsequent synthetic reactions based on these fractions as substrates could lead to compounds with a higher relative tritium content than the bulk water supply.

Smith and Epstein (1970) demonstrated that all plants tested gave a similar fractionation ratio between protium and deuterium when the source of water was common to all species. They also showed that, although very little discrimination against deuterium occurred at the cell membrane, the photosynthetic splitting and incorporation of the water fragments into organic compounds resulted in a fractionation ratio of 0.958, or, in other words, there was a discrimination of 4.2% against deuterium. An additional difference of 9.2% was found between carbohydrates and lipids. The overall fractionation from water to lipid ranged from about 13 to 17%. Fat synthesis was previously singled out by Bokhoven and Theeuwen (1956) as a process resulting in a considerable isotope effect. These same authors could also distinguish between synthetic and fermented ethanol by the lower deuterium content of the latter due to the combined discrimination effect against environmental deuterium in various metabolic processes.

Very high fractionations have been reported by some authors. For instance, Weinberger and Porter (1953) measured tritium incorporation in *Chlorella pyrenoidosa* and reported that the specific tritium activity was only 47% of that expected based on the specific activity of the water. Later, the same authors (1954) reported on fractionation between various organic fractions. Their method included extracting components with methanol and isolating cells by repeated resuspensions in water. Unfortunately, these methods provided ample opportunity for tritium exchange with the hydrogen in the solvents. Consequently, the fractionation values which they reported are probably high. In an aquatic system at the Nevada Test Site, *Typha* and *Potamogeton* samples were collected in Haines Pond by Brown. The pond was formed by water seepage originating near an underground nuclear detonation site, and contained a relatively high concentration of tritium. Analysis of the two plant species showed a higher tritium activity in the free water and organic fractions of both species than in the pond water. These data are similar to several studies (Weinberger and Porter, 1954; Cohen and Kneip, 1973) which make it tempting to assign the differences of tritium concentrations found in various compartments of the plant-water-sediment system to biological fractionation. However, no valid interpretation of these results can be made without detailed information on the history, the water turnover rate, and the contamination source. The drawing of conclusions based on incomplete data has particularly plagued aquatic-tritium studies.

In an attempt to evaluate the extent of fractionation in crop plants, McFarlane (1976) grew alfalfa plants in tritiated nutrient solution within a sealed growth chamber. In these experiments great care was taken to assure that equilibrium conditions persisted throughout the growing period. It was found that a discrimination of 22% had occurred against the incorporation of tritium into the total organic complex which made up the leaves and stems.

## EFFECTS

The effects on plants of tritium incorporation are caused by the mass difference, the beta particle emission, or the properties of the decay product, helium-3.

Deuterium is the ideal tool to study the role of mass difference because it differs from protium and tritium only in mass and is not radioactive. As far back as 1937, deuterium was reported as retarding respiration in yeast (Taylor and Harvey, 1937). Germination of seeds and spores and the growth of *Chlorella* were shown to be inhibited in proportion to the concentration of D₂O in the culture solution (Crumley and Meyer, 1950). Weinberger and Porter (1954) observed *Chlorella* cell enlargement in the presence of D₂O and additional evidence by Bennett et al. (1958) pointed out that this can occur in the absence of cell division. They also observed that *Chlorella* cells could be acclimated to D₂O by gradually increasing the D₂O concentration in the culture medium. Blake et al. (1968) suggested that the effect of deuterium on embryo development was lessened by the presence of large hydrogen-containing food reserves in the seed. The same researchers (Crane et al., 1969) later separated the embryos from various seeds and showed that D₂O inhibited all species in the same manner.

Biological effects caused by deuterated water molecules are probably associated with a change in the average free energy of metabolic water. From the potentials of D₂O listed in Table 1, it is obvious that putting tissue into pure D₂O would cause a tremendous osmotic shock, i.e., at 25°C it would be comparable to immersing the tissue sample into a solution more concentrated than 7 M NaCl. Since the water potential (\(\Psi_w\)) equals the sum of the component potentials, the potentials of mixture of D₂O (or HTO) with water are proportional to the abundance of D₂O (or HTO);

\[
\Psi_w = \Psi_1 a_1 + \Psi_2 a_2,
\]

where \(\Psi_1\) and \(\Psi_2\) represent the water potentials and \(a_1\) and \(a_2\) represent the fractional portion of the solution volume represented by H₂O and D₂O (or HTO), respectively, and where, by definition, \(\Psi_{1,\text{H}_2\text{O}} = 0\).

When HTO is added to H₂O the water potential of the solution is therefore

\[
\Psi_w = \Psi_{\text{HTO}} a.
\]

Thus, when evaluating experiments conducted with high levels of D₂O (or HTO), considerable attention should be given to the water potential gradient imposed by the treatment. Available literature indicates that, at a concentration of D₂O < 1%, effects are not generally evident. At 35°C this corresponds to a water potential of about -1.7 bars. Unfortunately, this aspect has generally been overlooked.

In contrast to many deuterium studies, the concentration of tritium found in environmental water, and as used in most experiments, is generally so small that its effect on the average molecular free energy is insignificant and can be ignored. For example, it can be shown by using the specific activity of tritium (Ci/g), Avogadro's number (molecules/mole), and the molecular weights of HTO and H₂O (g/mole), that a solution of 1 μCi/mL (which is much higher than environmental levels, but representative of some experimental concentrations) contributes only one molecule of HTO per 1.83 × 10¹¹ molecules of H₂O. Thus, the significant effects of tritium on biological systems are not due to mass differences, but rather to the beta radiation resulting from decay and/or to the nature of the decay product.

The effect of ionizing radiation (x-rays) on bean roots has been one of the classical demonstrations of radiation effects. Many outstanding works on this subject were authored by Gray, Thoday, Read, and Scholes in the British Journal of Radiology from 1942 to 1952. Their work showed that the apical meristem of the root was radiosensitive and was, therefore, a good system to study relative biological effectiveness. Spaulding et al. (1956) repeated Gray's techniques and compared the effects of x-rays to the damage found in plants exposed to beta radiation from HTO. They immersed bean roots in HTO and calculated the dose from diffusion time and the specific activity of the treatment solution. Exposure times were from 1 to 4 hours and no consideration was given to residual tritium which became part of the organic molecules. Their calculations showed a relative biological effectiveness of 1.0 ± 0.06 according to the equation:

\[
\text{RBE} = \text{effect of } \beta \text{ dose} / \text{effect of x-ray dose}.
\]

They concluded that, in their systems, beta radiation derived from the decay of tritium in the plant water had the same effect both quantitatively and qualitatively as did 175 kilovolt peak x-rays applied externally.

In the process of preparing tracers by exposing soybeans to carbon-14 labeled carbon dioxide and HTO, Chorney et al. (1965) observed effects on the growth rate and gross morphology of the soybean plants. Somatic aberrations caused by tritium resulted in characteristic bulbous enlargements at the nodes and below the terminal inflorescence, and the leaves were mottled just as in other radiation treatments. These observations were assigned to a calculated accumulated dose of 1,000 rads which resulted from growing the plants in culture solution containing 37.5 μCi/mL of tritium. The differences in growth rates between the treated plants and the controls were reported, but these data are of questionable value since in the hermetically sealed growth chambers the carbon dioxide (CO₂) concentrations were allowed to fluctuate between 50 and 1,000 ppm, while the control plants were grown in atmospheric levels of CO₂. Seeds from the plants exposed to tritium contained 17.6 μCi of tritium per gram. When germinated they exhibited a pigment abnormality in the primary leaves.

Continued culturing (18 mo) of alfalfa plants in hydroponic solution within a closed environmental simulator containing 300 nCi/mL of tritium as HTO revealed neither detectable morphological damage nor alteration of any of the measured physiological parameters (CO₂ assimilation, transpiration, stomatal resistance, leaf temperature) of the plants (J. C. McFarlane. 1975. Unpublished data.). However, using an extremely sensitive indicator of somatic alteration, Vig and McFarlane (1975) showed genetic effects in soybean plants when the seeds were germinated in water containing as little as 10 nCi/mL of tritium.

When a beta particle is emitted from an atom, a recoil energy is imposed on the atom. In the decay of ³²P this energy is sufficient to cause bond breakage. In tritium decay, the maximum recoil energy is too small to have much effect on chemical bonds (Woodward, 1970). However, the decay product of tritium is helium-3, which cannot form a chemical bond to the parent atom, and the bond breaks. The replacement of the helium atom with stable hydrogen has been thought to occur with sufficient ease to cause little or no effect. This logic has led to the belief that all damage caused by tritium in biological systems, whether somatic or genetic, was the effect of the radiated 0.005 × 10⁻⁶ eV beta particle. One experiment which argues against this rationale was conducted by Funk and Person (1969). They showed that decay of tritium incorporated in the 5-position of cytosine resulted in a specific mutation. This specificity argues in favor of assigning the effect to the transmutation of tritium to helium which causes interruption of the coding sequence at a particular point. When helium is formed, it immediately leaves the site formerly occupied by the tritium atom, and the atom formerly bound to the tritium atom becomes a free radical. Free radicals are usually highly reactive, unstable species which can stabilize by combining with another free radical or by intramolecular rearrangements. This is often accompanied by the elimination of an atom or molecular fragment, and the formation of a double bond in the parent molecule. Therefore, it should be remembered that the possibility of damage other than via direct radiation has largely been ruled out by hypotheses and not by test.

## PITFALLS

Many pitfalls await the investigator studying tritium in biological systems. Experimental errors are generally associated with the isotopic fractionation effect, and most commonly occur during the steps of sample collection, storage, and preparation for analyses. It has already been pointed out that tritium bound to oxygen as in water, alcohols, organic acids, carbohydrates, etc., exchanges with similarly bound hydrogen. Therefore, if a tritium-containing plant sample is in contact with moist air between the time of collection and the time of tritium analysis, sufficient exchange with atmospheric water vapor may occur to invalidate the analysis. This is even more critical when the samples are in contact with liquid media which contain exchangeable hydrogen. Not only is the plant water affected but tritium atoms incorporated into organic molecules as hydroxyls are also readily exchanged (Lang and Mason, 1960). Under appropriate conditions, this could amount to a tritium loss of about 30% from the plant organic material.

Tritiated water is often collected from plant, animal, and soil samples by freeze-drying or other methods of vacuum extraction. The fractionation between HTO and H₂O occurring during this step under some conditions may account for large errors. Because the degree of fractionation is inversely proportional to the temperature of the evaporating solution, the error is larger when the sample is chilled or frozen. Even without intentional freezing, sample temperatures usually decrease during vacuum vaporization unless the heat loss due to the heat of vaporization is compensated for by heating the sample. Figure 3 shows the temperature of plant and soil samples during water evaporation at 0.1 mm Hg and an ambient air temperature of approximately 25°C. The water was collected from these samples in 5-mL increments and each increment was analyzed for tritium content. Figure 4 shows the relationship between the tritium activity in each increment and the total amount of moisture removed. From this type of data, correction factors (Riley and Brooks, 1964) could be used to calculate the true tritium concentration of the samples. However, this procedure is risky when high accuracy is desired, since sample type and size, rate of water vaporization, and temperature all independently influence the degree of fractionation. Using a vacuum extraction system, the only way to assure an accurate analysis of extractable water appears to be by collecting 100% of the tissue water. Even this may result in errors, if organic tritium is part of the desired data. The tritium concentration of the free water remaining in the sample increases during the water extraction (Fig. 4). Thus, the last water to evaporate may be 30% higher in tritium than the original plant free water. Since the tritium in water can readily exchange with up to 30% of the hydrogen atoms in the organic fraction, an artificial tritium enrichment (up to 9%) of the organic fraction could occur.

*[Fig. 3—Temperature of a 100-g soil sample (···) and a 150-g plant sample (---) during vacuum extraction of water (ambient temperature 28°C).]*

*[Fig. 4—Tritium in water samples (—) recovered in 5-mL increments for plant material by vacuum extraction. The dotted line denotes the calculated tritium concentration in the plant tissue water during the extraction.]*

A preferred method for critical work is based on the formation of an azeotropic mixture between the sample water and a suitable organic solvent, such as toluene or benzene. An excess of the dry solvent is added to the sample, the azeotrope is removed by distillation, and the tritiated water separated from the distillate. This method is reportedly less subject to isotopic fractionation (Cline, 1953; Moghissi et al., 1973b).

Another error based on isotopic fractionation became apparent during experiments with HTO conducted in an environmental simulation chamber. The chamber humidity was controlled by a coil cooled to 10°C and the condensate dripping from the coil was analyzed for tritium as an indicator of the HTO concentration in the chamber air (Table 3, Column B). In a control experiment, air from the chamber was passed through a molecule sieve and the water was extracted by azeotropic distillation; another air sample was passed through freeze traps and the water pooled for analysis. Both control experiments gave identical results and are believed to be the true values for tritiated water vapor (Table 3, Column A). In a third part of the test, chamber air was passed through a condenser kept at 20°C for partial condensation, followed by freeze traps which collected the remaining water vapor (Table 3, Columns C and D). These data show that isotopic fractionation occurred whenever partial condensation occurred. Variations of the relative humidity in the chamber did not reveal any particular trend in the results, suggesting that the condenser temperature (10 or 20°C) was more important than the condensation rate. The difference between Column B and Column C is in line with the expected temperature effect on the vapor pressure ratio of H₂O/T₂O.

**Table 3—Tritium content of water vapor collected by different methods.**

| Relative humidity, % | Control† | Humidity control equipment (10°C) | Condenser (20°C) | Freeze trap following |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| | | % of control | | |
| 35 | 100 | 114 ± 2‡ | 111 ± 1 | 95 ± 1 |
| 55 | 100 | 113 ± 4 | 108 ± 2 | 90 ± 9 |
| 90 | 100 | 118 ± 3 | 107 ± 2 | 96 ± 4 |

† Control water collected by freeze trap and by molecular sieve (both methods gave identical results). Condensed water collected from the humidity control equipment (10°C). Air drawn past a condenser (20°C) and then through a freeze trap.
‡ Standard deviation of replicate analysis.

These samples show that failure to consider and apply all of the appropriate experimental controls and failure to take into account all of the possibilities of isotopic fractionation can easily cause errors of up to 30% in tritium research.

## Consequences of Tritium Incorporation—Plants

With the increase in the number of fission reactors and nuclear fuel reprocessing facilities in many countries and with the probable future use of tritium-based fusion reactors, the production of tritium will increase, and so will its releases to the environment. Prolonged high-level exposures of large areas to tritium are unlikely, because of rapid dilution in either the hydrosphere or atmosphere. This will lead to a slow increase of the entire environmental tritium burden.

Radiation doses from environmental tritium are low. The Federal Radiation Council cites 170 mrem/year as the recommended maximum radiation dose from all sources except medical radiation and natural background for the human population. This conservative figure is designed to be below the dose which could cause any damage to man. Using a quality factor of 1.0, the recommended maximum dose from tritium would be 170 mrads if tritium were the only source of radiation. Near the Humboldt Bay Pacific Gas and Electric nuclear power reactor, plant samples were collected which contained up to 3.8 nCi/liter of tritium in the extractable plant water. If this were a chronic contamination level, the plant would have an absorbed dose of 0.00044 mrads/year. Compared to the 170 mrads suggested as safe for man, this seems to be an insignificant dose. Compared to the 1,000 rads used by Spaulding et al. (1956) in their experiments, even the highest doses which were observed in plants near that reactor were miniscule.

## References

[List of references as in original text...]