# Tritium fractionation in plants

J. C. McFARLANE
Environmental Monitoring and Support Laboratory, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Las Vegas, NV 89114, U.S.A.

*Environmental and Experimental Botany* 16, 9–14, 1976.
(Received 7 July 1975)

**Abstract** — Alfalfa plants were hydroponically grown in environmental growth chambers in which they were continually exposed to tritium throughout growth. All segments of the environment were in equilibrium with respect to the specific activity of tritium. The tritium content in plant organic matter was about 22% lower than in the plant free water or rooting solution. Under conditions of low transpiration, there was a higher concentration (about 1–8%) of tritium in the leaves than in the stems and rooting solution. This is thought to represent the result of fractionation during transpiration.

## INTRODUCTION

In 1931, Urey, Brickwedde and Murphy(19) demonstrated the existence of deuterium by separating it from ordinary hydrogen and analyzing it in a mass spectrometer. This discovery was possible due to different masses which resulted in the separation or fractionation of the two isotopes. The importance of this mass difference, and the possibility of fractionation of hydrogen isotopes in biological systems has been of concern since that time. The thermodynamic basis for isotopic fractionation was presented by Urey and Rittenberg(18) only two years after its discovery. Additional considerations of isotope fractionation have been detailed by several authors including Bigeleisen,(2,3) Wiberg,(23) Salomon(14) and Weston.(22) Because water is the most abundant hydrogen-containing molecule and is essential to all living organisms, it has been the object of most fractionation studies. In plants, water functions as a reactant, temperature regulator, and transport medium. Fractionation may be expected at several sites, not particularly dependent on its position or function, but rather on the type of reaction, degree of compartmentation, and on the source of energy causing the reaction. However, when water moves in response to a pressure gradient, the energy is imposed at a site remote from the molecules being moved. This mass flow of water, such as occurs in the xylem and in soil, is not subject to molecular fractionation. This does not eliminate the possibility of observing fractionation along a water transport continuum, but if observed, it is clear that fractionation must have resulted from reactions such as exchange or dilution. When reactions depend on the molecular free energy of the hydrogen-containing species, fractionation is always possible. This occurs in chemical reactions and other processes such as exchange and evaporation which are the result of molecular diffusion.

When fractionation occurs between molecules containing tritium or deuterium, and those with normal hydrogen, there are always two results: (1) the newly formed product is depleted in the heavier isotope, and (2) the substrate is enriched. If the substrate pool is large or is rapidly being replenished, the effect of isotopic fractionation can be observed by separating and analyzing both segments. But if the substrate is formed at the same rate as the product, such as in a chain of reactions, the concentration of the heavy isotope in the substrate increases until a steady state is reached and an equilibrium concentration is achieved. The existence of this steady state fractionation is difficult to observe because the size of the substrate pool is often so small that it precludes isolation, and because the net or overall fractionation is very small.

It was shown by Stewart(17) that a characteristic fractionation occurs in the exchange of hydroxide ions from water to specific clays. None was observed in water percolation. Although this fractionation may be important in identifying the age of soil water where the flow rate is slow, it is generally concluded (Zimmermann),(24) that, in an agricultural setting, fractionation in soil water has an insignificant impact in terms of tritium availability to plants.

Reports of hydrogen isotope fractionation in plants started in 1934.(20) Since then, many reports have been published giving evidence of hydrogen isotopic fractionation in plants. Reports of Washburn and Smith(20) and Zimmermann et al.(24) indicate that no fractionation occurs during transpiration; however, Wershaw et al.(21) reported that deuterium was greatly enriched in the leaves of trees with respect to the water in the xylem and phloem. Most studies have indicated a discrimination against the heavy hydrogen isotopes in the synthesis of organic molecules. Smith and Epstein(16) showed that in marsh plants a 4–4% fractionation occurred in the formation of organic compounds. In addition, a fractionation of 9–2% occurred between carbohydrates and lipids. An apparent exception was demonstrated by Helvey(7) when he showed that honey had a higher deuterium content than the apparent water source.

A literature review by Bruner(4) contains lists of data from studies comparing the tritium content in various segments of plants and animals. Some data support the idea of discrimination against heavy hydrogen, some suggest preferential accumulation, and some report no fractionation. Thus, as a result of the conflicting general summaries reported, there is considerable confusion in the literature regarding hydrogen isotope fractionation in biological systems.

Difficulties in sample preparation and experimental design have made a complete understanding of fractionation difficult. Problems which are most often overlooked in plant research, and which are most often the source of serious errors, are caused by failing to understand the rapid exchange which can occur between tritium in water, either in solution or vapor, and the OH groups, especially on carbohydrates.(9) This may partially account for the lack of agreement in the literature regarding the extent and nature of hydrogen isotope fractionation. Field studies are especially plagued by another problem: the interaction of time on the interpretation of results. It is tempting to analyze a plant or animal for tritium existing in various compartments and assign differences to isotopic fractionation. However, it is obvious, but sometimes forgotten, that compartmentation is based on both a physical and time separation.

The purpose of this work was to carefully investigate the fractionation of tritium from protium in the formation of organic molecules in plants grown in a controlled, uniformly tritiated environment. Also, the experiment was designed to measure any fractionation which may occur during transpiration and absorption.

## METHODS

Alfalfa plants (*Medicago sativa*) were grown in an environmental simulation chamber from seedlings to mature plants. The chamber was designed to eliminate air leakage(8) and thus allowed the maintenance of a uniformly tritiated environment throughout growth. Radiant energy was produced by cool white fluorescent and incandescent lamps and yielded a quantum flux of 325 micro Einsteins per square meter per second in the wave band from 400 to 700 nm at the level of the plant containers. The temperature was maintained at 25 ± 0.5°C during the day and 20 ± 0.5°C at night. Relative humidity was 70 ± 4%. Carbon dioxide was monitored continuously and maintained at 350 ± 15 PPM by automatic metered injections of CO₂. Humidity was controlled by the temperature of a cold radiator and the condensate was collected and reused to fill the hydroponic containers. Thus, the water moved in a cycle through the plants into the air, and returned to the rooting medium. The tritium concentration of the water was generally maintained at 100 nCi/mL and was monitored periodically. When additional water was added to replace water lost in harvesting, it was made up at the same concentration of tritium. Once every two months, the buckets containing the hydroponic solution were drained and cleaned to remove organic debris and refilled with fresh hydroponic solution.(1) In the interim, the nutrient content of the solution was maintained by measuring pH and electrical conductivity and adding water or nutrients as needed.

The alfalfa plants used in these studies were grown in support of another project(13) and were only sampled for fractionation evaluation after reaching maturity from the previous harvest in an undisturbed chamber (about five weeks).

When harvested, plants were immediately placed into benzene. Water was extracted by heating the benzene to form a water/benzene azeotrope, and was collected by cooling the distillate.(12) This collection system has been shown to be free of isotopic discrimination, which is an extremely important consideration not true with many drying systems; nevertheless, all the free water was collected to ensure accurate analysis. The plants were dried of benzene in desiccators under vacuum with great care being exercised to eliminate contact with the ambient environment. This precaution was taken to eliminate the possibility of hydrogen exchange from water vapor and cellulose OH groups. When dry, the plants were transferred to a stainless steel container (Parr bomb) and ignited in an O₂ atmosphere of 500 psi.(11) The water of combustion was collected by bleeding the air from the bomb slowly through a liquid nitrogen trap. Water samples were analyzed by liquid scintillation counting.(12)

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The concentrations of tritium in plant free water, gross organic structure, and in the nutrient solution are shown in Table 1. These results have been normalized to reflect the concentration of the hydroponic solution as being 100%. The experiment was repeated three times with four replicates at each harvest. Although the hydroponic solutions were slightly different between harvest dates, the coefficient of variation of the replicated hydroponic solution was less than 0.7% in all cases. Records of the tritium concentration in the hydroponic solution were kept throughout the growth. The concentration did not vary more than ±1% from the time of harvesting the last crop until harvesting the experimental samples. Using all 12 sets of data, paired *t*-tests showed significant differences between the concentrations of tritium in the free water and in the organic portions at the 0.001 level.

**Table 1. Relative tritium concentrations in percent of plants grown in a constant and uniformly labeled environment**

| Hydroponic solution | Plant free H₂O | Water from oxidation of organic hydrogen |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 100.0 ± 0.2*† | 97.4 ± 0.6 | 77.5 ± 1.9 |

* Based on paired *t*-tests of 12 replicates, the mean values are significantly different from each other at the 0.001 level.
† The 95% confidence interval. Normalized to hydroponic solution.

The fractionation between the free water and the organic constituents of the plant is extremely difficult to evaluate in the field and under most experimental conditions because the plant water is rapidly exchanged with the water source. In these experiments where the environment was carefully controlled to eliminate these variables, the tritium fractionation between free water and organics was about 22%.

Experience gained in conducting these studies has fortified an awareness of the potential problems associated with sampling and analysis for tritium content. The most significant type of error that may occur involves the exchange of tritium from water, liquid or vapor, with hydroxyl groups which constitute approximately 30% of the hydrogen in carbohydrates. A discussion of the pitfalls in sampling plants for tritium analysis is to be published under a separate title.(10) Comparison of these data with other values indicates a higher degree of fractionation than previously reported.(4) This has probably resulted from the differences in sample preparation and analysis and also from the fact that plants were maintained in a uniformly labeled environment during their entire development.

Discrimination against the incorporation of deuterium into organic compounds has consistently been reported, but the fractionation values are generally lower than the 22% determined in these experiments.(15,16,20) Values generally run about 3 to 5%; however, in marine plants, where uniform exposure conditions persist values tend to be higher and range to 16%. Fractionation in chemical and physical reactions is a function of the difference in the masses of the isotopically different molecular species. Deuterated water (HDO) with a molecular weight of 19 and tritiated water (HTO) with a weight of 20 obviously differ in their potential for fractionation from regular water, which has a weight of 18. Although it is tempting to compare fractionation values in all heavy water studies, it is obvious that these comparisons are only valuable when the above concept is clearly in mind. Thus there is no reason to expect similar values even though the fractionation of deuterated and tritiated water occur for the same reason and at the same sites. The higher value reported in this paper is consistent with physical and chemical laws and is thought to represent the true fractionation for alfalfa grown under the conditions specified. Other values are certainly expected in crops which synthesize different primary products. In the case of high fat or high protein content, such as produced in plants like castor and soy bean, it would be expected that even higher fractionation values would exist. These products are produced from the primary carbohydrates and are therefore further down the chain of chemical reactions in which fractionation can occur.

As a hazard to man it is logical to consider the tritium pathway through the environment. Since the main threat of tritium is imposed when it is a component of nucleic acids, the content of organic precursors is important. Nucleic acid synthesis is primarily dependent on the assembly of organic fragments, many of which may enter through the gut in the form of sugars, fatty acids and amino acids. If these compounds are tritiated in plants, then the possibility is enhanced for contamination of genetic material. One theory holds that genetic damage is primarily dependent on the disruption of the coding material by the transmutation of tritium into its decay product, helium.(6) Specific damage which is expressed in this manner would therefore be particularly sensitive to tritium-contaminated organic assimilates. Consequently, depletion of the tritium content of plant organic material is an important bit of information needed to assess the potential of tritium as a pollutant.

Dongmann et al.(5) observed a cyclic change in the ¹⁸O content in leaf water of two tree species. The heavy water content increased to about 2% higher than in the stems during the day and decreased at night. This increase is of similar magnitude to the value in Table 2 for slowly transpiring alfalfa plants. There was no difference in the tritium content of water extracted from leaves and stems of alfalfa harvested at night, or when transpiration was rapid. This information that there is a transpirational rate associated with a maximum fractionation. According to this hypothesis, very slow transpiration rates will result in water or organic concentrations lower than the maximum. This will result from slower evaporation and therefore lower rates of fractionation. On the other hand very high transpiration rates will yield leaf tritium concentrations lower than the maximum, not because of decreased fractionation, but because the rapid transpiration rate facilitates the removal of the product (water with increased tritium concentration) at rates faster than it can be accumulated in surrounding parenchyma cells. The supply of water to the evaporative surface is predominantly by mass flow and is therefore not expected to be subject to fractionation.

Fractionation in evaporation is familiar to all who have tried to collect water from plants and soil by any of the evaporation methods. It may therefore be surprising to find that fractionation has not been consistently reported in plant transpiration. Transpiration is a diffusive phenomenon that is dependent upon the molecular free energy of the water molecule. Thus, it falls into the category of reactions subject to fractionation. The data in Table 2 show that when all conditions remained constant except the rate of transpiration, which was decreased by increasing the humidity, there was an apparent fractionation between the water in the stem and leaves of alfalfa plants.

**Table 2. Tritium concentration in free water of alfalfa stems and leaves under conditions of slow and rapid transpiration**

| | Slow transpiration (High relative humidity 70%) nCi/mL | Rapid transpiration (Low relative humidity 25%) nCi/mL |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Leaves | 77.2 ± 0.6* | 75.4 ± 0.5 |
| Stems | 75.4 ± 0.5 | 75.8 ± 0.5 |
| Hydroponic solution | 75.0 ± 0.6 | 75.1 ± 0.5 |

* Significantly different from other means at the 0.05 level based on paired *t*-tests.
† The 95% confidence interval.

Observable fractionation is dependent on the diffusive movement of tritium away from the evaporative site into the surrounding tissue. When the flux of water toward the evaporative site is rapid, diffusive movement against this mass flow current is an improbable occurrence. Higher tritium concentrations at the evaporation surface will correspond with more tritiated water evaporation. Thus if tritiated water diffuses away from this site slowly a steady state will be created in which the incoming water and outgoing water vapor will be of similar tritium concentrations, and a higher concentration will exist only on the very small region in which the phase change occurs. Impact on and detectability in plants is therefore a complicated function of the transpiration rate.

In the case of H₂¹⁸O enrichment, the photosynthetic splitting of water to form O₂ was thought to account for the enrichment of atmospheric ¹⁸O₂ content. Since the masses of H₂¹⁸O and HTO are similar, the magnitude of fractionation in both cases should be equal. Comparison of the values in Table 2 with Dongmann et al.(5) seems to verify this. In terms of research this observation may have facility in characterizing the evaporative surfaces in plants. However, in terms of radiation protection this small fractionation is probably of no consequence.

In summary it was concluded from experimentation in a controlled environment that tritium was fractionated at several sites in plants. Discrimination against tritiated water entering plants was not evident but, under conditions of slow transpiration, a small fractionation could be detected in the leaves. Discrimination against tritium in the formation of organic compounds was about 22%.

**Acknowledgement** — I wish to express appreciation to Harry Hop for operation and maintenance of the growth chambers and oxidation of plant material. His professional approach and technical expertise contributed greatly to the success of these experiments.

## REFERENCES

1. Berry W. L. (1971) Evaluation of phosphorous nutrient status in seeding lettuce. *J. Am. Soc. Hort. Sci.* 93, 341–344.
2. Bigeleisen J. (1949) The validity of the use of tracers to follow chemical reactions. *Science* 110, 14–16.
3. Bigeleisen J. (1965) Chemistry of isotopes. *Science* 147 (3657), 463–471.
4. Bruner H. D. (1973) Distribution of tritium between the hydrosphere and invertebrates. Pages 303–317 in A. Moghissi and M. W. Carter, eds. *Tritium* CONF 710809, Messenger Graphics, Phoenix, AZ and Las Vegas, NV.
5. Dongmann G., Förstel H. and Wagener K. (1972) ¹⁸O-rich oxygen from land photosynthesis. *Nature (London) New Biol.* 240, 127–128.
6. Funk F. and Pearson S. (1969) Cytosine to thymine transitions for decay of cytosine 5-³H in bacteriophage, S13. *Science* 166, 1629–1631.
7. Helvey T. C. (1953) The natural concentration of deuterium in honey. *Science* 117, 276–277.
8. Hill A. C. (1967) A special purpose plant environmental chamber for air pollution studies. *J. Air Pollut. Control Assoc.* 17 (11), 743–748.
9. Lang A. R. G. and Mason S. G. (1960) Tritium exchange between cellulose and water: Accessibility measurements and effects of cyclic drying. *Can. J. Chem.* 38, 373–387.
10. McFarlane J. C., Beckert W. and Brown, K. W. (1976) Tritium in plants and soil. *Environ. Prot. Agency Rept. Ser.* (in press).
11. Moghissi A. A., Bretthauer E. W., Whittaker E. L. and McNellis D. N. (1975) Oxygen bomb combustion of environmental and biological samples for tritium analysis. *Anal. Chem.* 26, 339–342.
12. Moghissi A. A., Bretthauer E. W. and Compton E. H. (1973) Separation of water from biological and environmental samples for tritium analysis. *Anal. Chem.* 45, 1565–1566.
13. Moghissi A. A., Stanley R. E., McFarlane J. C., Bretthauer E. W., Patzer R. G. and Lloyd S. R. (1974) Biological concentration of tritium. *Proc. Intern. Congr. Radiat. Res., 5th* 1974, Seattle, Washington, U.S.A.
14. Salomon M. (1966) Isotope effects in mixtures of liquid H₂O and T₂O. *Can. J. Chem.* 44, 689–694.
15. Schiegl W. E. and Vogel J. C. (1970) Deuterium content of organic matter. *Earth Planet Sci. Lett.* 7, 307–313.
16. Smith B. N. and Epstein S. (1970) Biogeochemistry of the stable isotopes of hydrogen and carbon in salt marsh biota. *Plant Physiol.* 46, 738–742.
17. Stewart G. L. (1972) Clay-water interaction, the behavior of ²H and ³H in absorbed water, and the isotope effect. *Soil Sci. Soc. Am. Proc.* 36, 421–426.
18. Urey H. C. and Rittenberg D. (1933) Some thermodynamic properties of the H¹H² molecules and compounds containing the H² atom. *J. Chem. Phys.* 1, 137–143.
19. Urey H. C., Brickwedde F. G. and Murphy G. M. (1932) A hydrogen isotope of mass 2. *Phys. Rev.* 39, 164–165.
20. Washburn E. W. and Smith E. R. (1934) The isotopic fractionation of water by physiological processes. *Science* 79, 188–189.
21. Wershaw R. L., Friedman I., Heller S. J. and Frank P. A. (1969) Hydrogen isotopic fractionation of water passing through trees. Pages 55–67 in *Advances in organic geochemistry*. Proc. Third International Conference.
22. Weston R. E., Jr. (1973) Kinetic and equilibrium isotope effects of tritium substitution. Pages 289–303 in A. A. Moghissi and M. W. Carter, eds. *Tritium*, CONF 710809, Messenger Graphics, Phoenix, AZ and Las Vegas, NV.
23. Wiberg K. B. (1955) The deuterium isotope effect. *Chem. Rev.* 55, 713–743.
24. Zimmermann U., Ehhalt D. and Muennich K. O. (1967) Soil-water movement and evapotranspiration: changes in the isotopic composition of the water. Pages 567–584 in *Isotopes in Hydrology*, Proc. symp., Vienna, 1966.