# Tritium Content in Komatsuna Cultivated in Tritium-Contaminated Peat Soil

Michael Oftosu Portuphy, Kazunari Katayama & Takahiro Matano

**Citation**: Michael Oftosu Portuphy, Kazunari Katayama & Takahiro Matano (2024) Tritium Content in Komatsuna Cultivated in Tritium- Contaminated Peat Soil, Fusion Science and Technology, 80:3- 4, 276- 284, DOI: 10.1080/15361055.2023.2298519

**Link**: https://doi.org/10.1080/15361055.2023.2298519

**Published**: 17 Jan 2024.

## Abstract
Tritiated water from fusion power reactors will be the next major issue when fusion technology comes fully onstream. Effective radiation protection measures will be implemented when the scope of its behavior is well understood. To understand tritium behavior in the environment, komatsuna was cultivated in tritium- contaminated peat soil. It was indicated experimentally from water immersion experiments that the amount of tissue free water tritium in komatsuna depends on the tritium concentration in the soil and that the concentration in stems and leaves in komatsuna decreases as the tritium concentration in the soil decreases. The amounts of tritium retained in the roots were much less than that in the stems and leaves.

**Keywords**: Tritium, komatsuna, tissue free water tritium, soil.

## 1. INTRODUCTION

In the proposed deuterium- tritium (D- T) fusion reactor, substantial amounts of tritiated waste are expected to be generated during operation and decommissioning. The D- T reactor uses tritium as fuel causing a substantial contamination of waste. Tritium permeation behavior in the metal cooling tubes under extreme fusion conditions and tritium's relatively long half- life require stringent radioactive waste management strategies. Tritium is a beta- emitting radioisotope with a half- life of 12.32 years. Because of its low beta particle energy, internal exposure is of concern in dose assessment. Naturally, tritium is produced by cosmic interactions with atmospheric gases and particle capture reactions of nitrogen and oxygen. It is produced artificially during nuclear fuel cycle operations and, recently, during the testing and operation of fusion devices. In principle, tritium is produced when fast- moving neutrons strike targets (e.g., Li and B). This phenomenon has been used in many so- called tritium breeding activities such as the tokamak.

Mostly, tritiated water released into the environment behaves similarly to the water cycle. In the atmosphere, tritium exists as tritiated water vapor (HTO), gas (HT), or tritiated methane (CH_{0 - 4}T_{4 - 0}). These gaseous tritium fractions are directly deposited on plant and soil surfaces by dry deposition processes. Further, through isotopic exchange in the atmosphere, HTO gas is washed out on interaction with water molecules during rain, snow, or fog and deposited through wet deposition. This is not the same for HT and tritiated methane due to their lower solubility compared to HTO. Intercepted tritiated fractions are incorporated into plant tissues through stomatal diffusion processes or by simple absorption. Some gases are also washed out during rainfall and deposited on plant and soil surfaces of which about 50% is evaporated into the atmosphere. Further, more than 30% of tritiated water percolates into the soil and gets absorbed through root hairs and stems in contact. A significant amount of this water is lost through evapotranspiration and is dependent on biological activity, climatic factors, and geological factors. About 10% of tritiated water absorbed in the soil percolates downward under the influence of gravity and diffusion into deeper layers. Through these routes, tritium accumulates in plants and may easily be transferred to other organisms within the biosphere.

### I.A. Tritium in Biological Systems

Tritium exists in different forms in plant tissues. It is found in the plant water pool as tissue free water tritium (TFWT) in forms such as HT, HTO, and T+. TFWT is not bound to specific tissues and can be easily assessed and measured. Through photosynthesis and other metabolic processes, tritium is incorporated in organic matter as organically bound tritium (OBT). This is further classified as either exchangeable organically bound tritium (e- OBT) or non- exchangeable organically bound tritium (ne- OBT) with regard to the nature of tritium bonds with chemical elements within the plant. Exchangeable OBT has tritium bonded to either sulfur, oxygen, or nitrogen while ne- OBT has tritium bonded to carbon. Because of the relatively stronger C- T bonds than S- T, O- T, and N- T, it is difficult for tritium in ne- OBT to be exchanged with other components of the organisms. The contribution of neOBT to total tritium dose exposure is still debated within the tritium community; however, total doses due to OBT are considered significant in tritium exposure assessment.

Tritium behavior in plants has been studied for many species including rice, wheat, and vegetables. Tritium dose is estimated by quantifying the total amount of TFWT and OBT present in the sample. The relative stability of C- T bonds implies that neOBT tends to have a longer residence time in biological systems as compared to TFWT and eOBT, which are in equilibrium and labile. This equilibrium process was confirmed in isotopic exchange experiments on arabidopsis, where a faster mass transfer rate of eOBT to tissue free water (TFW) was reported as compared to that from TFW to water. Atarashi- Andoh, Ichimasa et al. and Momoshima conducted experiments using heavy water D2O as a substitute for tritium in rice cultivation. Rice plants were exposed to D2O vapor at different growth stages. Reported results showed an increased OBT concentration with increased growth rate.

For daily variations, Choi et al. reported significant HTO uptake during the day (three times) than at night, explained by reduced stomatal activities. Experiments on cherry tomatoes and soybeans confirmed significant HTO uptake during the day. Similar studies on soybeans in Japan reported different OBT concentrations in the leaves and stem of the same plant. HTO uptake in the leaves was 0.32 times slower than in the stem. The experiments cited earlier exposed plants to either tritiated water or deuterated water in gaseous forms after which plant tissues and cultivated soils were analyzed for tritium.

Soil medium is one main route for tritium cycles where tritium remains persistent within the environment. Tritium could remain in soil interstitial layers and be absorbed by plants roots. It could also be evaporated into the atmosphere or be percolated into deeper layers.

Tritium measurements in plants have indicated about 80% to 90% TFWT, 5% to 10% eOBT, and 1% neOBT. However, there are wider variations in these approximations in some plants, and standardization of methods for OBT analysis is desired. So far, the XP M 60- 824 (2016) standard developed in France, adopted and modified by some countries, is under consideration by other laboratories with an increased focus on the need for a certified reference material for tritium in environmental matrices. Soil, consisting of mostly inorganic and dead materials, has tritium in the form of TFWT. Tritium behavior in soil is not well understood due to the different modes of exposure and nonuniform soil structure, which causes misestimation.

### I.B. TFWT and OBT Measurement

Tritium measurement in soil and biological samples involves analysis for TFWT, eOBT, and neOBT. Recent radiocological studies have tried to optimize the analysis methods described by improving instrumentation. In this experiment, for TFWT analysis, samples are initially rinsed with tritium- free water followed by a short period of immersion in water. Rinse water and immersion water are analyzed for tritium using liquid scintillation counting (LSC). TFWT extraction is completed by vacuum drying and collecting released tritium in bubblers containing tritium- free water. Wet gas is passed over the sample similarly to extract eOBT. At this stage, it is possible to have a mixture of TFWT and eOBT due to the equilibrium between these tritium forms.

Because of the stronger C- T bonds in neOBT, analysis is done by a destructive method. This involves combusting the dry sample completely under the flow of O2 gas. The liberated combustion water containing neOBT is trapped in water- filled bubbles and analyzed using LSC. These analysis methods were used due to the high concentration of tritium used, the small sample size, and the need for a rapid analysis. More details of sampling techniques and measurement of OBT and TFWT in different plant species can be referred to.

In this work, the komatsuna plant was cultivated on peat soil contaminated with tritiated water in a controlled environment. The amounts of TFWT in the stems, leaves, and roots of komatsuna were evaluated by water immersion. Additionally, the amount of tritium of the soil in which komatuna was cultivated was also evaluated by water immersion. Based on the experimental results, the relationship between tritium in soil and tritium in komatsuna was discussed. For the stem sample of komatsuna, the ratio of TFWT, eOBT, and neOBT was evaluated.

### I.C. Liquid Scintillation Counting

Liquid scintillation counting is a good analytical tool for detecting and quantifying low- energy beta- emitting radionuclides as well as some alpha emitters. Liquid samples are placed in plastic vials and dissolved in a chemical cocktail comprising an organic solvent, fluor for absorbing energy, a waveshifter solution that reemits photons of longer wavelengths, and additives to improve the counting efficiency. The samples transmit their energy to the cocktail, which absorbs and reemits it as light. These emissions are detected, and the signals are processed and quantified by output systems. In this experiment, the low- background Aloka AccuFLEX 7200 counter with a measurement efficiency of >60% was used. Its detection limit is 0.01 Bq with average recorded background value of 0.97 Bq / mL. The external standard method for calibration was done using standard reference material 4947C from the National Institute of Standards and Technology. Also, quench correction was done using an external standard channel ratio technique with an unquenched standard from the Japan Radioisotope Association. PerkinElmer® superpolytethylene 20- mL vials were filled with a 1- mL water sample mixed with an 8- mL PerkinElmer® EMULSIFIER- SAFETM scintillation cocktail. Because of the high tritium concentration used in this experiment, direct counting was performed on water sample fractions with no pretreatment at a counting rate of 3 min / sample.

## II. EXPERIMENTAL

### II.A. Soil Conditioning and Plant Cultivation

Peat is a widely used medium for plant cultivation due to its rich nutrient value. It includes dead organic tissues from plant and animal sources that had been dampened to provide optimal temperature and pH conditions. Peat is added or used exclusively depending on cultivation needs to support plant growth in inorganic soils. This experiment used commercially available peat soil (HYPONeX JAPAN CORP., LTD), with 60% moisture. Vermiculite was also added to enhance moisture retention. Humidity was kept between 40% and 60% with temperature ranging between 25°C and 28°C.

Komatsuna, a leafy vegetable popularly eaten in Japan, was grown in the laboratory. Seeds were nursed using water- soaked peat pellets. After germinating to about 5 cm, plants were transferred to a 70- cm^3 pot half- filled with peat soil. In the laboratory, a light for plant growth was installed at the upper part, and the plants were sufficiently grown at a temperature of about 25°C for about 50 days. Water was supplied once a day unless the soil was extremely dry. The plants were transferred to the Radioisotope Center of Ito Laboratory in Kyushu University for the tritium exposure experiments.

As shown in Fig. 1, six plants grown in each pot were placed in an airtight glove box installed in an incubator. They were given six names from A through F. To unify the growth conditions of the plant cultivated in each pot, all leaves were excised once at the start of the experiment. Tritiated water of 150 kBq / cm^3 was supplied at 6 cm^3 directly to the soil in each pot. By evaporation from the soil and transpiration of the plants, the tritium concentration in the atmosphere in the glove box is expected to be increased. This leads to the absorption of tritium to the plants from not only soil but also atmosphere. Because this experiment focuses on the tritium transport to plants from soil, the atmosphere inside the glove box was constantly ventilated. Normal air was supplied at 0.8 L / min by a pump and exhausted at 1.5 L / min by another pump. By setting the exhaust flow rate higher than the supply flow rate, the pressure inside the glove box was kept slightly lower than the atmospheric pressure, preventing tritium from leaking to the outside. The exhausted air was passed through two series of water bubbles to collect tritiated water vapor. Artificial illumination was done with an installed fluorescent lamp to simulate daytime settings. The illumination was turned on and off every 12 h. As water for cultivation, tap water sterilized by boiling at 120°C for 25 min in an autoclave was used to suppress the growth of mold. Water was supplied once a day, except on weekends and holidays when the radioisotope center was closed and when the soil was extremely dry. These conditions were selected to simulate natural growth conditions.

After pouring tritiated water into the soil, the komatsuna leaves and stems were sampled over a period of 86 days. A part of the soil was also collected to evaluate the tritium amount in the soil. The stems were collected seven times, the leaf was collected five times, and the soil was collected four times. At the end of the experiment after 70 to 80 days, the whole komatsuna plant was collected separately into main stem, lateral stem, leaves, main root, and lateral root.

### II.B. Sample Treatment and Water Immersion

The komatsuna leaves, stem, and roots were sampled in 20- mL polyethylene vials. Because of transpiration from plant tissues and evaporation from the soil surface, tritium is expected to be deposited on the plants and the soil medium. As shown in Fig. 2, the sample surfaces were rinsed by submersion in 12 cm^3 of distilled water for about 1 min. For LSC, 1 cm^3 of aliquot was sampled.

To evaluate the amount of TFWT, the plant leaves and stems were later immersed in water in each polyethylene vial. The amounts of water were 22 cm^3 for stems and 120 cm^3 for leaves, respectively. Tap water mixed with about 18% ethanol was used as immersion water to prevent rot of the samples. Until the tritium concentration in the immersion water became steady by the progression of an isotope exchange reaction between water and TFWT, 1 cm^3 of immersion water was periodically sampled, and the tritium concentration was measured by a liquid scintillation counter.

### II.C. Drying, Isotope Exchange, and Combustion Experiments

To extract the slight TFWT left in the sample after water immersion, the sample was dried in vacuum, and released tritiated water was collected in water bubbles. The experimental setup is shown in Fig. 3. After immersion in water, the sample was removed from the water, and the water adhering onto the surface of the sample was wiped off. Then, the samples were weighed and packed in a quartz tube, and both ends of the sample bed were supported with quartz wool. A valve on the upstream side of the quartz tube was closed; a diaphragm pump was operated, and vacuum drying of the sample was performed. The released tritiated water vapor was collected in double water bubbles. Water in the amount of 1 cm^3 was periodically sampled from the bubbles, and the tritium concentration was measured by the liquid scintillation counter. Vacuum drying was terminated when the increase in tritium concentration in the bubbler water was no longer observed.

After vacuum drying, the sample was taken out from the quartz tube and weighed. After that, the sample was packed in the quartz tube again. The valve on the upstream side of the quartz tube was opened, and the diaphragm pump was operated. The air flow rate introduced in the quartz tube was adjusted with a flow controller installed upstream of the pump. In this process, eOBT was extracted through an isotope exchange reaction with water vapor in air. A hygrometer monitored the humidity in the introduced air to be between 60% to 70%.

Air drying was terminated when the increase in tritium concentration in the bubbler water was no longer observed.

After air exposure, the samples were transported to a new quartz tube for combustion to extract neOBT. The experimental setup for combustion is shown in Fig. 4. The samples were heated at 800°C for 30 min by an electric furnace with flowing wet gas, which contained oxygen. This purge gas was generated by passing 1% H2 / Ar gas and 40% O2 / Ar gas through a Pt catalyst bed. The flow rate of 1% H2 / Ar gas was 80 cm^3 / min and that of 40% O2 / Ar gas was 20 cm^3 / min. The water vapor in the purge gas recovered tritium sorbed on the piping system at the downstream of the quartz tube by the isotope exchange reaction. The released tritium was collected by two series of water bubbles. A Pt catalyst bed was set between the first bubbler and the second bubbler and heated to 400°C. HTO was collected in the first bubbler, and HT and hydrocarbon such as CH3T were collected in the second bubbler. The tritium concentration in each bubbler was measured by the liquid scintillation counter.

## III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Lateral stems were collected after 1, 8, 34, 42, 54, 72, and 86 days, and leaves were collected after 34, 42, 54, 72, and 86 days after pouring tritiated water on the soil. Figure 5 shows the change of tritium concentration in the water immersing the lateral stems collected from Komatsuna A, B, and D cultivated for 34 days, where the values are normalized by the weight of the samples. It shows that TFWT retained in the stems is relatively quickly released into water by isotope exchange reaction with water. The release from xylem tissues and cuticular damage during the air- drying process may account for this observation.

Figure 6 shows the change of tritium concentration in immersion water for the leaves collected from Komatsuna A, B, and D cultivated for 34 days, where the values are normalized by the weight of the samples. Like stems, TFWT retained in leaves is released into water relatively quickly through isotope exchange reactions with water.

There was no significant difference in the tritium release behavior between the stems and leaves during water immersion, and the retention amounts were similar. After 86 days, the komatsuna was about to wither. The stems and leaves of this sample were also collected and immersed in water, but no release of tritium into water was observed. This indicates that the TFWT contained in the plant is released into the atmosphere when the plant dies.

After 54 days of long- term growth, the whole komatsuna was sampled from the roots; separated into stem, main root, and lateral root; and immersed in water. Figures 7 and 8 show the time variation of the tritium concentration in the water immersing the stem and immersing the roots, respectively. In these figures, the value at time zero is the background value before the sample was immersed in water. Obvious release of tritium was observed from the stem, and it was confirmed that TFWT was present even after 54 days. On the other hand, the increase in tritium concentration in the water immersing the roots was slight. No obvious tritium release was observed from the lateral roots. Although the tritium concentration in water immersing the main root increased slightly, there is a suspicion of adhesion of tritium- contaminated soil. The amounts of tritium released from the roots were much less than that from the leaves and the stems. It was found that tritium in soil is transported to stems and leaves through roots, but tritium retention in roots is much less than that in stems and leaves.

After pouring tritiated water into the soil, the amount of tritium in the soil is expected to decrease with time due to direct evaporation from the soil and transpiration through plants. In this study, not only plants but also soil was sampled, and the tritium amount in it was measured. About 2 g of the soil was collected from each pot for Komatsuna A through F and immersed in water. The samples were collected 22, 49, 70, and 134 days after the tritiated water was poured. An immediate increase in tritium concentration was observed after soaking the soil in water, as was the case with leaves and lateral stems. It is thought that the tritiated water retained in the soil was released into the water quickly.

Figure 9 shows the relationship between the amount of tritium released from the soil to water and the cultivation time at the time the soil was sampled. It is clearly shown that the amount of tritium in each soil decreased at almost the same rate with elapsing cultivation time. The reduction in soil concentration may be due to leaching of tritium down the cultivating soil, evaporation, and uptake by komatsuna. It may also be influenced by the biological half- life even as the samples decompose.

Figure 10 shows the time variation of the amount of tritium per unit mass released from the stems and soil by water immersion. It is clearly shown that the amount of tritium released from the stem decreases with elapsing cultivation time. The amount of tritium released from the leaves also tended to decrease with elapsing cultivation time. It can be experimentally indicated from these results that the amount of TFWT in komatsuna depends on the tritium concentration in the soil, and its concentration in stems and leaves in komatsuna decreases as the tritium concentration in the soil decreases.

The amount of TFW in the sample can be obtained from the mass change before and after vacuum drying. By dividing the amount of TFWT by the amount of TFW, the approximate tritium concentration in TFW in the sample can be calculated. The calculations were done for the stems of samples B and C 1 day after tritiated water was poured and for the leaf of sample A 34 days after. The obtained tritium concentration in each TFW was 8.8 kBq / cm^3 for sample B, 14.3 kBq / cm^3 for sample C, and 1.9 kBq / cm^3 for sample A.

The tritium concentration of water in soil can also be obtained by the same method, but vacuum drying was not performed for the soil samples in this experiment. Here, the tritium concentration in soil water was calculated assuming a water content of 70%. The obtained tritium concentration in each soil was 9.7 kBq / cm^3 for sample B, 11.1 kBq / cm^3 for sample C, and 1.6 kBq / cm^3 for sample A. These values are close to the tritium concentration in TFW of each sample. These results suggest that the tritium in the root zone was at equilibrium with that in komatsuna.

For the komatsuna stem sample sampled 1 day after tritiated water was poured in the soil, TFWT, eOBT, and neOBT were evaluated. The sample weight was 0.383 g. The tritium amount released in each process is summarized in Table I. The total amount of tritium retained in the sample was 8.736 kBq / g. No significant tritium release was detected in vacuum drying. This indicates that almost all TFWT was released by water immersion. A relatively large amount of tritium was extracted by air exposure after vacuum drying. It is speculated that the tissue in the stem was destroyed by vacuum drying and that eOBT, which could not be determined by the immersion water, could be extracted with water vapor in air and that tritium was released through an isotope exchange reaction.

## IV. CONCLUSION

Komatsuna was cultivated in peat soil contaminated by tritium with the results obtained shown above. There was no significant difference in tritium release behavior between stems and leaves during water immersion, and retention amounts were similar. The amounts of tritium released from the roots were much less than that from the stems and leaves. The amount of TFWT in komatsuna depended on the tritium concentration in the soil, and that tritium concentration in the stems and leaves in komatsuna decreased as the tritium concentration in the soil decreased. The tritium concentration in TFW contained in the stems and leaves of komatsuna was almost the same as the tritium concentration in water in soil. The ratio of the forms of tritium present in the stems of komatsuna 1 day after tritiated water was poured into the soil was 72.7% in TFWT, 19.4% in eOBT, and 7.9% in neOBT.

**TABLE I** Summary of Tritium Amount, Ratio, and Retention Form in the Stem of Komatsuna

| Process          | Tritium Amount (kBq) | Ratio, (Tritium Amount / Total Tritium %) | Retention Form |
| :--------------- | :------------------- | :---------------------------------------- | :------------- |
| Water immersion  | 2.433                | 72.7                                      | TFWT           |
| Vacuum drying    | Background level     | —                                         | TFWT           |
| Air exposure     | 0.650                | 19.4                                      | eOBT           |
| Combustion       | 0.263                | 7.9                                       | neOBT          |

## Disclosure Statement

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).

## Funding

This work was supported by Japan Society for the Promotion of Science KAKENHI Grant- in- Aid for Scientific Research (B) [JP22H01207].

## References

1. J. PAMELA et al., "Reducing the Tritium Inventory in Waste Produced by Fusion Devices," Fusion Eng. Des., 93, 51 (2015); http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.fusengdes.2015.02.043.
2. M. OTA et al., "Measurement and Modelling of Oxidation Rate of Hydrogen Isotopic Gases by Soil," J. Environ. Radioact., 97, 103 (2007); http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvrad.2007.03.006.
3. C. BOYER et al., "Tritium in Plants: A Review of Current Knowledge," Environ. Exp. Bot., 67, 34 (2009); http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envexpbot.2009.06.008.
4. C. E. MURPHY, "Tritium Transport and Cycling in the Environment," Health Phys., 65, 683 (1993); http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/00004032-199312000-00007.
5. Y. BELOT, "Tritium in Plants: A Review," Radiat. Prot. Dosim., 16, 1-2, 101 (1986); http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rpd/16.1-2.101.
6. Generic Models for Use in Assessing the Impact of Discharges of Radioactive Substances to the Environment, International Atomic Energy Agency (2001).
7. P. GUETAT, C. DOUCHE, and J. C. HUBINOIS, "Tritium and the Environment: Sources, Measurements and Transfers," Radioprotection, 43, 4, 547 (2008); http://dx.doi.org/10.1051/radiopro:2008027.
8. T. MATANO, K. KATAYAMA, and T. TAKEISHI, "Accumulation of Organically Bound Tritium in Arabidopsis Thaliana Cultivated in Soil Containing Tritiated Water," Fusion Eng. Des., 173, 112787 (2021); http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.fusengdes.2021.112787.
9. M. ATARASHI-ANDOH et al., "Formation of Organically Bound Deuterium at Each Growing Stage of Rice," Fusion Sci. Technol., 48, 771 (2005); http://dx.doi.org/10.13182/FST05-A1034.
10. M. ICHIMASA et al., "Organically Bound Deuterium in Rice and Soybean After Exposure to Heavy Water Vapor as a Substitute for Tritiated Water," Fusion Sci. Technol., 41, 393 (2002); http://dx.doi.org/10.13182/FST02-A22618.
11. N. MOMOSHIMA, "Uptake Kinetics of Deuteriated Water Vapor by Plants: Experiments of D2O Release in a Greenhouse as a Substitute for Tritiated Water," J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 239, 3, 459 (1999); http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF02349051.
12. Y. H. CHOI et al., "TFWT and OBT Concentration in Rice Plants Exposed to HTO Vapor During Daytime and Nighttime at Different Seed-Developing Stages," J. Radiat. Prot. Res., 28, 9 (2003).
13. S. B. KIM, "OBT Formation in Night Experiments and Modeling Trials at CRL," Proc. 3rd Mtg. International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) s Environmental Modelling for Radiation Safety (EMRAS II) Programme 2009-2011, Vienna, Austria, January 25-29, 2010, Working Group 7 "Tritium Accidents" (2010).
14. M. ICHIMASA et al., "Organically Bound Deuterium in Soybean Exposed to Atmospheric D2O Vapor as a Substitute for HTO Under Different Growth Phase," Proc. Int. Symp. Transfer of Radionuclides in Biosphere Prediction and Assessment, Mito, Japan, December 18-19, 2002, p. 226, Japan Atomic Energy Research Institute (2003).
15. K. FURUICHI et al., "Evaluation of Tritium Sorption Rate in Soil Packed Bed by Numerical Analysis," Plasma Fusion Res., 11, 2405050 (2016); http://dx.doi.org/10.1585/pfr.11.2405050.
16. N. BAGLAN et al., "Feedback of the Third Interlaboratory Exercise Organised on Wheat in the Framework of the OBT Working Group," J. Environ. Radioact., 181, 52 (2018); http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvrad.2017.09.009.
17. C. COSSONNET, A. M. N. MARQUES, and R. GURRARAN, "Experience Acquired on Environmental Sample Combustion for Organically Bound Tritium Measurement," Appl. Radiat. Isot., 67, 809 (2009); http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apradiso.2009.01.039.
18. D. GALERIU et al., "An Overview of Organically Bound Tritium Experiments in Plants Following a Short Atmospheric HTO Exposure," J. Environ. Radioact., 118, 40 (2013); http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvrad.2012.11.005.
19. M. F. L'ANNUNZIATA et al., "Liquid Scintillation Analysis: Principles and Practice," Handbook of Radioactivity Analysis, 4th ed, pp. 575-801 (2020).