# Uptake kinetics of deuteriated water vapor by plants: Experiments of D₂O release in a greenhouse as a substitute for tritiated water

**Authors:** M. Ichimasa$^1$, C. Komure$^1$, T. Hakamada$^1$, A. Li$^1$, Y. Ichimasa$^1$, H. Noguchi$^2$, S. Yokoyama$^3$, H. Amano$^4$, M. Atarashi$^4$

**Affiliations:**
1. Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Kyushu University, Hakozaki, Higashiku, Fukuoka 812-81, Japan
2. Department of Nuclear Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Kyushu University, Hakozaki, Higashiku, Fukuoka 812-81, Japan
3. Department of Health Physics, Japan Atomic Energy Research Institute, Tokaimura, Naka, Ibaraki 319-11, Japan
4. Department of Environmental Safety Research, Japan Atomic Energy Research Institute, Tokaimura, Naka, Ibaraki 319-11, Japan
5. Department of Public Health, Akita University School of Medicine, Hondo, Akita 010, Japan
6. Faculty of Science, Ibaraki University, Mito, Ibaraki 310, Japan

**Journal:** Fusion Engineering and Design (1997/1998)

**Received:** April 8, 1998

## Abstract

Potted plants were exposed to $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ vapor in a greenhouse and uptake of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ by leaf and deposition of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ to pot soil were examined. Atmospheric $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration in the greenhouse increased rapidly after starting the release and reached constant level in a few hours. Although the variation of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration in leaf followed that in air with showing a time delay, $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration in leaf did not become the same level as that in air and vein showed lower concentration than lamina. $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration in the pot soil increased slowly with diffusing in deeper layer.

## Introduction

A nuclear fusion reactor, International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER) under planing uses tritium as a fuel for D-T reaction; an estimated inventory of tritium in major process systems during steady-state operation is about $650\mathrm{g}$ without including that in a longterm storage vault and that of waste storage.$^1$ Thus the total amount of tritium in ITER would be comparable to that of natural tritium on the Earth.$^2$ Total operating releases of tritium from ITER to the environment under steady-state conditions is estimated to be less than $0.3\mathrm{g}$ (110 TBq) per year which satisfies the project limits for annual release of tritium. However, the behavior of tritium in the environment should be examined before its operation because handling of the huge amounts of tritium would increase the potential for environmental contamination. From a standpoint of radiation protection, tritiated water (HTO) is a primary chemical species to be examined because the concentration limit of HTO in exhaust gas is 18000 fold lower than that of tritiated hydrogen (HT). Exposure of plants and soil to HTO vapor around the facility is likely to occur in case of stack releases of tritium in the environment.

We carried out deuteriated water-vapor release experiments in a greenhouse constructed in the field and the contamination of plants and soil with deuteriated water vapor was examined in that.$^{3-6}$ We used deuteriated water as a substitute for HTO because release of HTO in the field is quite difficult in Japan due to regulations. The expression of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ is used as a representative of deuteriated water ($\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ and DHO) throughout this paper.

## Experimental

The $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ vapor release experiments were carried out in the Autumn of 1995 and in the Summer of 1996 at the campus of Ibaraki University. Greenhouses of 12.8 and $24.6\mathrm{m}^3$ volumes, with iron frames covered with plastic sheets, were constructed in 1995 and 1996, respectively, at the field. The floor of the greenhouse was the ground surface as it was where weed, mostly clover, was growing. In both experiments deuteriated water with $20\%$ $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration was vaporized with a ultrasonicwave humidifier, and mixed with dried air and introduced to the greenhouse from the inlet installed at $1.8\mathrm{m}$ height above the ground level. The air in the greenhouse was circulated with fans in the 1995 experiment and heaters were used to control temperature at the nighttime. Air conditioners and a shade sheet on the roof were used in the 1996 experiment to control air temperature at the daytime and the nighttime.

In the 1995 experiment the $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ vapor release was started at evening (18:30) and continued for 24 hours and then the plastic sheets of the greenhouse were removed to expose plants to the open air. Potted komatsuna, each had 4-6 leaves of about $20~\mathrm{cm}$ in length, and potted cabbage, each had 4 leaves of 10-15 cm in length, were placed in the greenhouse before starting the $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ release and exposed for 24 hours. Leaves of the plants and pot-soil core of komatsuna were collected at appropriate time intervals during the $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ and the successive open-air exposures.

In the 1996 experiment the $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ vapor release was started at morning (8:00) and continued for 48 hours. Water cultivated komatsuna, each had 10-12 leaves of about $25~\mathrm{cm}$ in length, put in a plastic bottle with tap water, was exposed at the daytime and the nighttime, respectively. For the daytime exposure komatsuna was placed in the greenhouse at noon, 4 hours later starting the $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ release and exposed for 6 hours. For the nighttime exposure komatsuna was placed at $6\mathrm{pm}$, 10 hours later starting the $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ release and exposed for 13 hours. Leaves were collected at appropriate time intervals during the exposures of daytime and nighttime.

Air moisture samples in the greenhouse were collected at 20, 50 and $100~\mathrm{cm}$ heights above the ground level for both experiments by passing the greenhouse air through a molecular sieves (MS) column in which $30~\mathrm{g}$ of MS were packed. The flow rates of the sampling air were adjusted to $1-3\mathrm{l/min}$ depending on the sampling period $(0.5-2\mathrm{h})$. Water adsorbed on the MS was recovered in a cold trap by heating the MS at $400^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$ under flowing dried $\mathrm{N}_2$ gas.

The leaves of komatsuna and cabbage from the 1995 experiment were cut to sections, lamina and major vein. The lamina was further divided half and half. The major vein of komatsuna from the 1996 experiment was divided into three sections; top, middle and bottom. The soil cores were divided into $1\mathrm{cm}$ sections from the surface. Free water of plants and soil water were recovered in a cold trap at dry-ice temperature by flowing dried $\mathrm{N}_2$ gas under warming the sample. $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration in the recovered water was measured with a gas chromatograph equipped with a TCD and was determined by working curve method.

## Results and discussion

### Variation of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentrations in air

The $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration in the atmospheric water vapor increased rapidly after starting the $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ release and reached an almost constant level in a few hours, showing about $30000\mathrm{ppm}$ in the 1995 experiment (Fig. 1) and $23000\mathrm{ppm}$ in the 1996 experiment (Fig. 3). Concentration difference depending on the sampling heights was not observed. In the case of the 1995 experiment temporary increase at early morning and temporary decrease at afternoon were observed. The $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ level in the greenhouse air decreased rapidly and returned to the open-air level of about $150\mathrm{ppm}$ by termination of the release and removal of the plastic sheet of the greenhouse. In the 1996 experiment a temporary decline in $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration was observed at the nighttime of the first day.

### Variation of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentrations in komatsuna and cabbage

$\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentrations of free water in leaves of komatsuna and cabbage from the 1995 experiment are shown in Figs 1 and 2, respectively, together with that of the greenhouse air. Each leaf sample was divided into two parts, major vein and lamina, and the lamina was further divided into two parts, to investigate the homogeneity of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ in the leaf. No difference in $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration was observed between the divided parts of lamina as shown in Figs 1 and 2, indicating a homogeneous distribution of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$, while significantly low concentrations were observed in the vein compared to the lamina. After $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration in the greenhouse air reached a steady-state condition, both plant species showed a relatively constant $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$-concentration ratio between lamina and atmosphere, that is, about 0.4. The $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration in the lamina of komatsuna and cabbage never reached the same level as that in the greenhouse air. Lower concentration in leaf than in atmosphere was observed on other plant species exposed in these experiments.$^{3-4}$ Relatively rapid response of komatsuna to the change of atmospheric $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration was observed; the $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration in lamina of komatsuna reached a constant level in 5 hours after starting the $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ release while that in cabbage was still increasing. The slower response of cabbage was also observed during the exposure to the open air.

$\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ or HTO flux occurs by concentration gradient between atmosphere and the free water of leaf. Evaporation of water causes a $\mathrm{H}_2\mathrm{O}$ flux from leaf to atmosphere which is resulting from the difference of water vapor densities existing between atmosphere and the cavity of stoma. Under the condition that leaf and air temperatures are the same, at steady-state condition the $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ or HTO concentration in leaf is expressed as follows:$^{4,7-8}$

$$\mathrm{Cl} = \mathrm{Ca}\cdot \alpha \cdot \mathrm{RH} \quad (1)$$

where $\mathrm{Cl}$ and $\mathrm{Ca}$ are the $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ or HTO concentration in leaf and atmosphere, respectively; RH is the relative humidity as the ratio of the air specific humidity to the saturation vapor density and $\alpha$ is the isotopic ratio $\mathrm{D}/\mathrm{H}$ or $\mathrm{T}/\mathrm{H}$ in liquid and vapor. For the practical use, relative humidity in cavity of stoma is assumed to be $100\%$.

**Fig. 1.** $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentrations in leaf of komatsuna and greenhouse air in the 1995 experiment

**Fig. 2.** $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentrations in leaf of cabbage and greenhouse air in the 1995 experiment

A total diffusion resistance for water molecule at the boundary between leaf and atmosphere affects on a time that is needed to establish the steady-state condition of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ or HTO concentration in leaf. Thus, the $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ or HTO concentrations in leaf at steady-state conditions is determined by the relative humidity and the isotopic ratio. Total diffusion resistance of komatsuna and cabbage measured at the daytime and the nighttime are summarized in Table 1. At the daytime the total diffusion resistance of komatsuna and cabbage are similar and small suggesting rather rapid water-molecule exchange between atmosphere and leaf, while at the nighttime the total diffusion resistance increased indicating a longer time to the steady-state condition. The cabbage has 5 times larger total diffusion resistance than komatsuna that requires more time to come in a steady-state condition as observed in Fig. 2.

**Table 1.** Total diffusion resistance (s/cm) of komatsuna and cabbage

| | Komatsuna | Cabbage |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Daytime | 1-2 | 1-2 |
| Nighttime | 5 | 25 |

During the 1995 experiment, relative humidity was measured at different heights in the greenhouse. After atmospheric $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration reached a steady-state condition, $70-80\%$ of relative humidity was observed at the nighttime and did not differ with heights. At the daytime the relative humidity decreased from $75\%$ in the morning to $40\%$ in the afternoon due to an increase in air temperature. If the leaf temperature equals the air temperature, $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration in leaf was expected to be $70-80\%$ of the atmospheric $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration at the nighttime and about $40\%$ at the daytime by Eq. (1). As stated above, $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$-concentration ratio between lamina and atmosphere was 0.4 after the atmospheric $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration became a steady-state condition. The $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$-concentration ratio at the daytime is close to that predicted, however that at the nighttime was about half of the expected value. If the low $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration of komatsuna in the nighttime is attributed to pre-steady-state condition between atmosphere and leaf, we could expect the highest $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration before the sunrise in case of cabbage (Fig. 2). However, $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration in the lamina of komatsuna collected just before the sunrise did not show the highest value. MURPHY pointed out the possibility of decline in leaf-air tritium ratio compared to that predicted by Eq. (1) due to an increase in absorption of radiant heat load by the leaf.$^9$

The komatsuna and cabbage were placed in the greenhouse before starting the $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ release and the release was started at the evening after sunset. The stomata of the plants were already closed and the radiant heat load was low. The low $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration observed on komatsuna and similar $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ level to cabbage must have an other reason, but the reason is not clear.

### Variation of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentrations in vein

In the 1995 experiment the $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration change in the vein of komatsuna and cabbage seems to follow that of lamina. However, the $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration in the vein was low, showing a $0.12-0.5$ and $0.17-0.6$ fold diminution in the lamina of komatsuna and cabbage, respectively, during the $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ exposure. The low $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration in vein would be caused by diffusion of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ from lamina to vein or by a small number of stoma in the surface of vein which would allow a slow uptake of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$. Uptake of soil water with low $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration is also the cause for low $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration in vein when $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ source is atmosphere.

In the 1996 experiment the vein of komatsuna was divided into three sections; top, middle and bottom and analyzed. No significant difference was observed on the $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration for the different sections of the vein. The homogeneous distribution of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ in the vein suggests that the $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ in the vein was mainly supplied by water-molecule exchange between atmosphere and surface of vein, not by the diffusion of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ from lamina to vein. If diffusion contributed to elevation of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ level in the vein, the top section of the vein would have higher $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration than other sections because the lamina was developed at the top section of the vein. The change in $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration of vein of komatsuna is shown in Fig. 3 for the daytime and nighttime exposures without distinction of the sections of vein. The $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration in the vein reached a steady-state condition in 2-3 hours for the daytime exposure, while in 4-5 hours for the nighttime exposure. The nighttime exposure gave a higher steady-state condition in $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration than the daytime exposure. The $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration of the pot water measured 3 hours after starting the daytime exposure and 13 hours after the nighttime exposure, was low indicating the source of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ in the vein was not the pot water.

**Fig. 3.** $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentrations in vein of komatsuna and greenhouse air in the 1996 experiment

### Variation of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration in soil

At the early stage of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ exposure to plants, air is the only source of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ for leaf. With the progress of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ deposition from atmosphere to soil, soil will become another source of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ for the leaf. Profile of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ and the position of root in soil are important factors for determining the $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ level in leaf. $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ profile in the pot soil of komatsuna in the 1995 experiment is shown in Fig. 4 as a function of time. The soil was divided to 1 cm deep layers from the surface. The $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration was highest in the most upper layer $(0-1\mathrm{cm})$ followed by 1-2 cm and 2-3 cm layers. During the $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ exposure period we did not water the pots and no rain was observed after removing the plastic sheet. Then the $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ profile in the soil observed could be established by the diffusion process of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$. The water content of the soil was about $19\%$ and was maintained at similar levels throughout the experimental period. Assuming $2.5\mathrm{g}/\mathrm{cm}^3$ for specific gravity of soil, fractions of solid, liquid and gas phases of the soil were calculated and found to be $0.53:0.31:0.16$ respectively. Water molecules diffuse through liquid and gas phases in soil. The diffusion coefficient of water molecule in free air$^{10}$ is 4 orders of magnitude larger than that in free water.$^{11}$ $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ profile is calculated assuming the soil column is full with interstitial water and $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ diffuses only in the free water phase. The calculated results and observed $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ distribution in the soil are compared in Fig. 5 suggesting diffusion of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ in the soil is comparable to that in free water. Use of the diffusion coefficient in free air predicted a large diffusion depth (a few meter) which must give homogeneous $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration in the upper layers $(0-3\mathrm{cm})$. In an actual soil column $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ diffuses in a deeper layer through spaces connecting liquid and gas phases and the diffusion rate in the gas phase is much larger than that in the liquid phase. The observed slow diffusion would be resulted from distortion of the space in the soil that retards diffusion.

**Fig. 4.** $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration of soil in the 1995 experiment

**Fig. 5.** Observed and calculated $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentrations in soil at 12 and 24 hours after starting the $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ release

After removing the plastic sheet of the greenhouse, a decline in the $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration of the surface soil layer was apparent but for deeper layers it was not. Difference in $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration with soil depth was disappeared after 15 hours. If soil water was taken up by komatsuna from upper soil layers $(0-3\mathrm{cm})$ $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration in vein would approach the level of soil water with time passed. However, the $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration ratios between vein and soil were lower than unity even after 15 hours, suggesting that active roots were distributed in soil layers deeper than $3\mathrm{cm}$.

## Conclusions

Komatsuna and cabbage accumulated $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ in their leaves by water-molecule exchange between air and leaf soon after they were exposed to $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ vapor. The accumulation rate of komatsuna was faster than that of cabbage, which is attributed to difference of diffusion resistance at the boundary between leaf and air. $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration in vein of komatsuna was lower than that of lamina and its homogeneity suggests that $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ in the vein was supplied by water-molecule exchange through stoma in the surface of vein.

## References

1. ITER Design Report, J. Plasma Fusion Res., 73 Supplement (1997) (in Japanese).
2. S. OKADA, N. MOMOSHIMA, Health Phys., 65 (1993) 595.
3. M. ICHIMASA, C. KOMURE, T. HAKAMADA, A. LI, Y. ICHIMASA, H. NOGUCHI, S. YOKOYAMA, H. AMANO, M. ATARASHI, Fusion Eng. Des., (1997) to be published.
4. M. ATARASHI, H. AMANO, M. ICHIMASA, Y. ICHIMASA, Fusion Eng. Des., (1997) to be published.
5. Y. ICHIMASA, M. ICHIMASA, Fusion Eng. Des., (1997) to be published.
6. S. YOKOYAMA, H. NOGUCHI, M. ICHIMASA, Y. ICHIMASA, S. FUKUTANI, Fusion Eng. Des., (1997) to be published.
7. Y. BELOT, D. GANTHER, H. CAMUS, C. CAPUT, Health Phys., 37 (1979) 575.
8. H. AMANO, M. ATARASHI, in: Symp. on Improvement of Environmental Transfer Models and Parameters, M. J. FRISSEL, R. M. BROWN and S. UCHIDA (Eds), Tokyo, 1996, p. 136.
9. C. E. MURPHY, Jr, Health Phys., 47 (1984) 635.
10. American Institute of Physics Handbook, McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1957.
11. J. H. WANG, C. V. ROBINSON, I. S. EDELMAN, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 75 (1953) 466.