# Uptake of Heavy Water and Loss by Tangerine in the Heavy Water Vapor Release Experiment in a Greenhouse as a Substitute for Tritiated Water

**Authors:** Y. Ichimasa, E. Sasajima, H. Makihara, H. Tauchi, T. Uda, M. Ichimasa

**Affiliations:**
- Department of Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Science, Ibaraki University, 2-1-1 Bunkyo, Mito, Ibaraki, 310-8512, Japan. yichima@mx.ibaraki.ac.jp.
- \*National Institute for Fusion Science, 322-6 Oroshicho, Toki, Gifu, 509-5292, Japan.

**Journal:** Fusion Science and Technology, 48:1, 775-778 (2005)

**DOI:** 10.13182/FST05-A1035

## Abstract

Heavy water $(\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O})$ vapor release experiments were carried out in a greenhouse using deuterium as a substitute for tritium and uptake and loss kinetics of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ in leaf of a tangerine tree and formation, translocation and retention of organically bound deuterium (OBD) in tangerine exposed to $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ under different growth stage were investigated. Rate constants of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ uptake in leaves of tangerine were $0.2-1.11 \mathrm{hr}^{-1}$ in the daytime release and $0.03-0.12 \mathrm{hr}^{-1}$ in the nighttime release. Rate constants of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ loss in leaf after daytime release were almost the same as those after the nighttime release. No significant differences in the half time of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ loss were observed between daytime and nighttime releases, but those in winter experiments were about 6 times higher than those in summer ones. The retention of OBD of the edible part of tangerine at harvest was very low and OBD was $0.08\%$ or $0.07\%$ on average of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ in air moisture in daytime or nighttime releases.

## I. INTRODUCTION

A great amount of tritium gas will be used in the future nuclear fusion reactors as fuel for DT reaction. Tritium is released into the environment during normal operation or by an accident. Among the chemical forms of tritium released in the environment, tritium gas is less toxic than tritiated water (HTO), but it can be oxidized to HTO by microorganisms in the soil and HTO has the most important contribution to dose estimation. Especially as for tritium taken into human body via food chain, the dose due to organically bound tritium (OBT) is 2.3 times higher than that due to HTO (ICRP 1995)[1]. Studies on OBT formation and translocation to the edible parts of vegetation in the local environment are limited [2-4] and required for dose assessment purpose. However it is difficult to do tritium release field experiments in Japan due to public acceptance problem. Thus heavy water $(\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O})$ vapor release experiments in a greenhouse have been carried out in the Mito campus of Ibaraki University using $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ as a substitute for HTO [5-7]. In this study, uptake and loss kinetics of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ in leaves and formation, translocation and retention of organically bound deuterium (OBD) in tangerine were reported.

## II. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS

Potted tangerines (Citrus unshiu Marc.), most popular citrus fruits in Japan, were used in two kinds of the experiments, $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ release experiment in a greenhouse and $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ exposure from soil water. The flowering stage of tangerine was from the middle to the end of April. The days of harvesting were December 24 in 2000, 27 in 2001 and 28 in 2002, respectively.

### II.A. $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ vapor release experiment in a greenhouse

Two greenhouses, $\{3.6\mathrm{m}(L)\times 1.8\mathrm{m}(W)\times 1.8\mathrm{m}(H)\}$ covered with vinyl sheets, were put on a campus field, one for daytime release and the other for nighttime release. $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ vapor generated by an ultrasonic humidity supplier containing $20\%$ $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ (in the case of the experiments held on 2002 Apr., $25\%$ $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ was used) was introduced with dry air into a greenhouse for 8 hours. Daytime release was conducted from 8:00 to 16:00 and nighttime release was from 20:00 to 4:00 in next morning. The temperature in the greenhouse was controlled by air conditioner and a shade on the roof if necessary. Table 1 shows the average temperature and relative humidity at the sampling point of tangerine in the greenhouses in 6 times of daytime and nighttime release experiments (Exp.No. I-VI) held from 2000 to 2002.

### II.B. $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ exposure experiment from soil water

After 1 liter of $20\%$ $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ was added to the soil of a potted tangerine (mean whole weight of $4.68\mathrm{kg}$ used in Exp. VII carried out on 31 Jul. 2002 and $5.69\mathrm{kg}$ in Exp. VIII on 12 Sep. 2002), excess water was leaked through the bottom hole, the part of pot was immediately wrapped up with vinyl sheet to prevent $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ evaporation from soil surface and putted on a campus field from 8:00 to 16:00. After exposure, potted tangerines were unwrapped and soaked in 5 liter of tap water for 15 min and the same treatment was successively repeated 4 times on the day, 3 times on the next day and 5 times on the third day. In Exp. VIII, 6 potted tangerines were divided into two groups (1) and (2). $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ exposure period of group (1) was also 8 hours, but in the case of group (2), $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ exposure was extended to 16 hours. $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ in soil water was measured using water leaked through the bottom hole of a pot after soaking.

### II.C. Sampling and Analysis

Collection of water from soil or tissue free water of plants (leaf, fruit or its segment and rind) was performed by a microwave oven. For determination of organically bound deuterium (OBD), non-exchangeable OBD, plant samples were dried for $48\mathrm{hr}$ in an oven at $60^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$ and followed by three times repetition of drying up after bathing with water. The dried samples were burned under high oxygen pressure in a chamber and the combustion water was collected using a cold trap. $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration in a sample was determined by gas-liquid chromatography equipped TCD. $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ uptake kinetic parameters of plant sample were calculated by fitting plant sample data to a kinetic model by Belot et al [8]: $\mathrm{C}_{\mathrm{p}} = \mathrm{C}_{\mathrm{max}}(1 - \mathrm{e}^{-\mathrm{kt}})$, where $\mathrm{C}_{\mathrm{p}}$ is $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration in a plant sample at time t, $\mathrm{C}_{\mathrm{max}}$ is the steady state concentration and k is the rate constant. In this study, we modified the equation as $\mathrm{C}_{\mathrm{pp}} = \mathrm{C}_{\mathrm{max}}(1 - \mathrm{e}^{-\mathrm{kt}})$ using $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration ratio instead of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration, i.e. $\mathrm{C}_{\mathrm{pp}}$ is $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration in free water of a plant sample $(\mathrm{C}_{\mathrm{p}}) / \mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration in air moisture $(\mathrm{C}_{\mathrm{a}})$ around sampling plant at time t, and then $\mathrm{C}_{\mathrm{max}}$ is the steady state concentration ratio, and calculated k and $\mathrm{C}_{\mathrm{max}}$ by a computerized non-linear least square method (NLIN procedure of statistical analyst systems: SAS). The rate constant of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ loss in plant was calculated by a equation: $\mathrm{C}_{\mathrm{p}} = \mathrm{C}_{0}\mathrm{e}^{-\mathrm{kt}}$, where $\mathrm{C}_{\mathrm{p}}$ is $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration in free water of a plant sample at the elapsed time (t) after the end of release, $\mathrm{C}_0$ is $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration in air moisture at time $\mathrm{t} = 0$ (the end of release). Translocation index (TLIa) [9] was calculated as follows: $\mathrm{TLIa} = \mathrm{OBD}$ in segment or rind of tangerine at harvest (ppm)/mean $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration in air moisture at steady state (ppm). Another translocation index $\mathrm{TLIp}$ [2] was also calculated as follows: $\mathrm{TLIp} = \mathrm{OBD}$ in segment or rind of tangerine at harvest (ppm)/mean TFWD in tangerine leaf at the steady state of exposure (ppm). In case of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ exposure from soil water, translocation index (TLIs) was calculated as follows: $\mathrm{TLIs} = \mathrm{OBD}$ in segment or rind of tangerine at harvest (ppm)/soil water $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration during exposure (ppm).

## III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

### III.A. $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ vapor release experiment in a greenhouse

In the daytime release, $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ concentration of tissue free water (TFWD) in tangerine leaf rapidly increased and reached almost a constant level during the release and the rate constants of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ uptake in tissue free water in leaf were $0.2-1.11\mathrm{h}^{-1}$, and several times higher than those in the nighttime release (TABLE I). These values were about one third those of leaf of rice plant and soybean [6]. The calculated steady state concentration ratios $(\mathrm{C}_{\mathrm{max}})$ of tangerine leaf were 0.37-0.82 in daytime releases and 0.24-1.16 in the nighttime. Lower values of k and $\mathrm{C}_{\mathrm{max}}$ observed in Exp. II were probably due to closing of stomata owing to high water stress caused by lower humidity and water supply among the experiments (data not shown). TABLE II shows the rate constant and half time of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ loss in free water in leaf of tangerine after the release. The loss rate constants in leaf TFWD were $0.8-1.4\mathrm{h}^{-1}$ in the daytime releases and almost the same as those in the nighttime ones. The half times of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ loss in leaf were $1.6-4.0\mathrm{h}$ and $0.9-4.5\mathrm{h}$ in the summer experiments, $5.2\mathrm{h}$ and $6.3\mathrm{h}$ in spring and $21.7\mathrm{h}$ and $16.5\mathrm{h}$ in winter in the daytime and nighttime releases, respectively, and these values were several times higher than those in leaf of rice and soybean in summer experiments [6]. These results suggested the effect of cuticle structure of tangerine leaf on uptake and loss kinetics of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ in leaf. The retention of OBD of the edible part of tangerine at harvest was determined and two kinds of parameter, $\mathrm{TLIa}$ and $\mathrm{TLIp}$ were calculated, since either which can be use as the need arises. TABLE III shows the TLI indexes of segment, the editable part of tangerine, and rind for comparison in Exp. I-VI. All fruits used in the following experiments were marked the day of flowering and thinning out of the fruits was conducted. From the growth curves of tangerine using weights (g) of fruits and their segments, plotted and fitted to the equation, $\mathrm{G(t) = Gmax \exp\{- \exp(- k(t - tc))\}}$, 49 and $39\mathrm{g}$ for Gmax, 0.037, 0.042 for k and 110 and 114 days for tc of a tangerine and its segments, respectively, and $\mathrm{G(0)}$ at the flowering day, Apr. 21, both growth rates (g/day) during the ripening period were calculated. Tangerines used in Exp. I, II and V were at the middle of the ripening period of fruits, with the highest growth rate of $0.61-0.65\mathrm{g/day}$ and those in Exp. III were in the latter period with growth rate of $0.41\mathrm{g/day}$. Exp. IV was conducted on 7 days before the harvest. In Exp. VI, tangerine fruits were divided into two groups, (a) flowering before $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ exposure and (b) flowering after $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ exposure, and analyzed. The values of $\mathrm{TLIa}$ and $\mathrm{TLIp}$ of segment of tangerine were very low and the means were $0.08\%$ and $0.15\%$ in daytime releases and $0.07\%$ and $0.35\%$ in nighttime releases, respectively, and the values of TLI in rind were also low and $1.1-1.4$ times those of segment.

**TABLE I.** Rate constant and steady state concentration ratio of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ uptake from air to tangerine leaf

| | | Average during D$_2$O release | | Rate constant | Steady state concentration ratio |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Experiment No.** | **Time** | **Temperature (°C)** | **Humidity (%)** | **k (h$^{-1}$)** | **C$_{\text{max}}$** |
| **Daytime release** | | | | | |
| I | Jul. 2000 | 29 | 56 | 1.11±0.29 | 0.51±0.03 |
| II | Aug. 2000 | 30 | 53 | 0.25±0.05 | 0.37±0.04 |
| III | Sept. 2000 | 24 | 81 | 0.54±0.09 | 0.70±0.03 |
| IV | Dec. 2000 | 11 | 58 | — | — |
| V | Aug. 2001 | 26 | 67 | 0.46±0.13 | 0.68±0.07 |
| VI | Apr. 2002 | 19 | 86 | 0.2±0.05 | 0.82±0.12 |
| **Nighttime release** | | | | | |
| I | Jul. 2000 | 25 | 92 | 0.03±0.08 | 1.01±2.71 |
| II | Aug. 2000 | 25 | 85 | — | — |
| III | Sept. 2000 | 23 | 96 | 0.08±0.07 | 0.62±0.46 |
| IV | Dec. 2000 | 7 | 80 | 0.12±0.09 | 0.24±0.12 |
| V | Aug. 2001 | 28 | 90 | 0.04±0.06 | 0.50±0.66 |
| VI | Apr. 2002 | 18 | 99 | 0.03±0.03 | 1.16±0.96 |

**TABLE II.** Rate constant and half time of TFWD loss from tangerine leaf

| Experiment No. | Time | Daytime release | | Nighttime release | |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| | | **k (h$^{-1}$)** | **t$_{1/2}$ (h)** | **k (h$^{-1}$)** | **t$_{1/2}$ (h)** |
| I | Jul. 2000 | 0.20 ± 0.012 | 3.4 | 0.29 ± 0.033 | 2.4 |
| II | Aug. 2000 | 0.17 ± 0.019 | 4.0 | 0.75 ± 0.126 | 0.9 |
| III | Sept. 2000 | 0.17 ± 0.023 | 4.0 | 0.28 ± 0.026 | 2.5 |
| IV | Dec. 2000 | 0.03 ± 0.007 | 21.7 | 0.04 ± 0.006 | 16.5 |
| V | Aug. 2001 | 0.42 ± 0.060 | 1.6 | 0.15 ± 0.060 | 4.5 |
| VI | Apr. 2002 | 0.13 ± 0.020 | 5.2 | 0.11 ± 0.030 | 6.3 |

**TABLE III.** Translocation indexes (TLIa and TLIp) in segment and rind of tangerine at harvest

| | | TLIa (%) | | TLIp (%) | |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Experiment No.** | **Time** | **Segment** | **Rind** | **Segment** | **Rind** |
| **Daytime release** | | | | | |
| I | Jul. 2000 | 0.01 | 0.08 | 0.02 | 0.16 |
| II | Aug. 2000 | 0.03 | 0.09 | 0.08 | 0.29 |
| III | Sept. 2000 | 0.08 | 0.01 | 0.12 | 0.01 |
| IV | Dec. 2000 | 0.03 | 0.05 | 0.13 | 0.22 |
| V | Aug. 2001 | 0.21 | 0.15 | 0.28 | 0.21 |
| VI | Apr. 2002(a) | 0.07 (0.16) | 0.06 (0.19) | 0.12 (0.27) | 0.10 (0.32) |
| | (b) | | | | |
| **Nighttime release** | | | | | |
| I | Jul. 2000 | 0.07 | 0.15 | 0.44 | 0.95 |
| II | Aug. 2000 | 0.05 | 0.04 | 0.21 | 0.19 |
| III | Sept. 2000 | 0.04 | 0.10 | 0.15 | 0.40 |
| IV | Dec. 2000 | 0.02 | 0.06 | 0.17 | 0.41 |
| V | Aug. 2001 | 0.11 | 0.09 | 0.71 | 0.63 |
| VI | Apr. 2002(a) | 0.05 (0.14) | 0.12 (0.10) | 0.21 (0.54) | 0.46 (0.39) |
| | (b) | | | | |

(a), flowering before $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ exposure ; (b), flowering after $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ exposure

### III.B. $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ exposure experiment from soil water

In the above $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ release experiments, $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ in soil water at the end of exposure was $6\%$ on average in the daytime release and decreased to back ground level (BG) at 3-4 days after exposure (data not shown). Exp. VII and VIII were intended to elucidate the contribution of soil water $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ to OBD in tangerine. After 8 hour exposure in Exp. VII, $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ in soil water decreased to BG after 13 times of aggressive washing and TFWD in leaf increased to the maximum, about $25\%$ of soil water $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ at 4 hours after exposure and then decreased gradually to BG after 2 weeks, while TFWD in rind and segment increased and reached to the maximum at 17 and 24 hours after 8 hour exposure, about $10\%$ and $6\%$ and then slowly decreased to BG after a month and three months, respectively. Although the similar patterns of uptake and loss of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ in rind and segment were observed in Exp. VIII, their TFWD concentrations in 8 hour exposure experiment were about one third those obtained in Exp. VII and showed much slower increase and decrease. These differences were probably caused by their lower growth rate in September than those in July. In both experiments, OBD in leaf increased and reached to the maximum at the end of 8 hour exposure from soil water $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ and then decreased to BG after a week, while the increase of OBD in segment continued until 24 hours after exposure and then decreased very slowly. OBD increase in rind was somewhat lower than that in segment. As shown in TABLE IV, the values of TLIs and TLIp in segment of tangerine were $0.10\%$, $0.41\%$ in Exp. VII and $0.13\%$, $0.52\%$ in Exp. VIII, respectively, and those in rind were lower and almost one half those in segment in Exp. VIII.

**TABLE IV.** Translocation indexes (TLIs and TLIp) in segment and rind of tangerine exposed to soil water $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$

| | D$_2$O in soil water (ppm) : A | TFWD in leaf at end of exposure (ppm) : B | OBD at harvest (ppm) : C | TLIs (%) (C/A) | TLIp (%) (C/B) |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Exp. VII, 2002 Jul.** | 120418 | 28538 | | | |
| Segment | | | 116 | 0.10 | 0.41 |
| 8 hr exposure | | | | | |
| Rind | 120418 | 28538 | 107 | 0.09 | 0.38 |
| **Exp. VIII, 2002 Sep.** | 114779 | 29145 | | | |
| Segment | | | 151 | 0.13 | 0.52 |
| 8 hr exposure | | | | | |
| Rind | 114779 | 29145 | 64 | 0.06 | 0.22 |
| **Exp. VIII, 2002 Sep.** | 147452 | 29413 | | | |
| Segment | | | 231 | 0.16 | 0.79 |
| 16 hr exposure | | | | | |
| Rind | 147452 | 29413 | 119 | 0.08 | 0.40 |

## IV. CONCLUSION

Uptake and loss kinetic parameters of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ in leaf of tangerine (Citrus unshiu Marc.) and translocation indexes in segment, editable part of tangerine, were obtained in daytime and nighttime $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ release experiments in a greenhouse held at different growth periods. The rate constants of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ uptake in tissue free water in leaf were $0.2-1.11\mathrm{h}^{-1}$ and several times higher than those in the nighttime release. The loss rate constants in leaf TFWD were $0.8-1.4\mathrm{h}^{-1}$ in the daytime releases and almost the same as those in the nighttime ones. The average translocation indexes (TLIa and TLIp) of segment of tangerine were $0.08\%$ and $0.15\%$ in daytime releases and $0.07\%$ and $0.35\%$ in nighttime ones, respectively. To assess the contribution of soil water $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ to OBD in tangerine, translocation of soil water $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ via leaf to OBD in segment of tangerine and retention of OBD in tangerine at harvest were investigated. TLIs and TLIp in segment of tangerine were $0.10-0.13\%$ and $0.41-0.52\%$, respectively.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This study is performed with the support and under the auspices of the NIFS Collaborative Research Program.

## REFERENCES

[1] ICRP, ICRP Publication 72, Pergamon Press, Oxford (1995).
[2] DIABATE, S., AND STRACK, S., "Organically Bound Tritium in Wheat after Short-Term Exposure to Atmospheric Tritium under Laboratory Conditions," J. Environ. Radioactivity, 36, 157 (1997).
[3] CHOI, Y.H., LIM, K.M., LEE, W.Y., DIABATE, S., AND STRACK, S., "Tissue free water tritium and organically bound tritium in the rice plant acutely exposed to atmospheric HTO vapor under semi-outdoor conditions," J. Environ. Radioactivity, 58, 67 (2002).
[4] ATARASHI-ANDOH, M., AMANO, H., ICHIMASA, M., AND ICHIMASA, Y., "Conversion rate of HTO to OBT in plants," Fusion Sci. Technol., 41, 427 (2002).
[5] ATARASHI-ANDOH, M., AMANO, H., M. ICHIMASA AND Y. ICHIMASA, "Deposition of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ from air to plant and soil during an experiment of $\mathrm{D}_2\mathrm{O}$ vapor release into a vinyl house," Fusion Engin. Design, 42, 133 (1998).
[6] ICHIMASA, M., WENG, C., ARA, T., AND ICHIMASA, Y., "Organically bound deuterium in rice and soybean after exposure to heavy water vapor as a substitute for tritiated water," Fusion Sci. Technol., 41, 393 (2002).
[7] ATARASHI-ANDOH, M., AMANO, H., KAKIUCHI, H., ICHIMASA, M., AND ICHIMASA, Y., "Formation and Retention of Organically Bound Deuterium in Rice in Deuterium Water Release Experiment," Health Phys., 82, 863 (2002).
[8] BELOT, Y., GAUTHIER, D., CAMUS, H., AND CAPUT, C., "Prediction of the flux of tritiated water from air to plant leaves," Health Phys., 37, 575 (1979).
[9] RASKOB, W., UFOTRI: Description of the New Version of the Tritium Model UFOTRI 4.0, including user guide. Report KfK-5194, Kernforschungszentrum Karlsruhe (1993).